Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
1
World Language Policy in the Era of Globalization: Diversity and
Intercommunication from the Perspective of 'Complexity'
by Albert Bastardas i Boada
Abstract
 The great difficulty is thus considering the unity of the many
 and the multiplicity of the unity. Those who see the diversity of cultures
 tend to overlook the unity of mankind;
 those who see the unity of mankind tend to dismiss
 the diversity of cultures.
Edgar Morin, L’identité humaine.
Summary
1. Introduction
2. Diversity and intercommunication: addressing language contact using the ‘complexity’
perspective
3. Language contact, equilibrium and shift
4. New principles for a new historical era
5. Immediate priorities for the general maintenance of linguistic diversity
6. Synthesis and conclusion: some principles and values for peace and linguistic justice
throughout the planet
1. Introduction1
The group of processes referred to as 'globalization' or 'internationalization', are constructing
a new sociolinguistic situation, at least for the most economically - and  technologically -
advanced areas of the planet, that we need to explore and understand fully if we want to be
able to control its effects and shape its development.
The linguistic consequences of this phenomenon  are caused mainly by the sharp increase in
the transnationalization of economies (wit h a trend towards global free trade and the
foundation of large corporations through merg ers and take-overs), and by developments in
communication technologies.
In the first instance, we see how extending tr aditional market boundaries produces the need
to learn new languages to enable negotiations with new suppliers and potential buyers.
Furthermore, as national firms are taken over by multi-national corporations and factories
belonging to the latter are set up in new territories, the need arises for staff (especially
highly-qualified staff and those holding intermediate and management positions) to know
and possess everyday usage of languages other than those of their traditional communities.
This series of economic factors then, tends to produce changes in the linguistic competences
required professionally and, hence, in the 'lan guage of work' factor which can, as we know,
have a profound influence, in specific contexts, on the stability or abandonment of the
languages of human groups.
In the second instance – developments in communication technologies – the Internet
phenomenon, particularly in the ‘First World’, has enabled people to access to web contents
and contact with each other on a daily basis over  long distances, thus breaking the limits of
physical proximity. Nowadays, large numbers of people communicate electronically with
others who live many kilometres away and whose first language can be one of a range of
different codes. Moreover, communication satellites make it increasingly possible to receive
                                              
1 Text of the plenary speech given at the World Congress on Language Policies (Barcelona, 16-20 April,
2002). In part, it is a re-working of ideas and perspectives I have been writing about in recent years.

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
2
broadcasts produced at great distances from the point of reception and, hence, in languages
other than those of the traditional community.
We are also seeing a number of actions, largely in response to these changes, in the political
organization of significant parts of mankind, particularly on a continental level. In Europe
then, a process of financial, political and cultural integration is underway. This process
requires solutions to problems caused by the creation of a large area of fluid interrelation
between a large number of human groups that speak different languages.
The traditional areas of human communication and interrelations are therefore undergoing a
substantial growth. Up until now, these areas had guaranteed the preservation of a certain
historical status quo which, at least for those groups able to retain their political autonomy,
had been able to keep individuals and societies in a certain functional monolingualism.
The expansion in areas of human interrelation (mainly economic and technological), is giving
rise to an important phenomenon of the bilingualization or functional polyglottization of many
individuals. This is due to the linguistic demands of the new situation and the fact that more
and more people see advantages in possessing multiple linguistic competences. A  novelty of
this process is that the knowledge of more than one language or having to use these with
different interlocutors or for different functions (an issue previously affecting only elite
groups or minoritized or small linguistic groups) is now an increasingly everyday
phenomenon for many individuals from larger an d/or majority linguistic groups within their
states.
This extended language contact and the polyglottal needs of more and more members of
human groups that were, up until now, non-minority (in the traditional sense of the word),
are generating feelings of cultural threat and defensive reactions, previously only
experienced by groups habitually minoritized th rough political integration without official and
public recognition. Although these feelings of linguistic insecurity and threat may be
exaggerated in most cases, this effect of globalization could be a good starting point for a
serious review of the foundations of the linguistic organization of mankind as a whole. Now
that this sense of feeling threatened is not ex clusive to politically-subordinated groups, now
that it encompasses those that are beginning to suffer from the (inter)dependence of
economies, technology and the mass media, it should be used to increase understanding of
the classical situation of minoritization by larger, minoritizing groups. We may well be on the
threshold of a new era in history where linguistic fraternity and intercomprehension between
the different human groups can progress and give rise to new, fairer principles of political
and linguistic organisation than those in place previously.
One extremely important issue that arises from  increased contact and interrelations is how
we humans can come to understand each other, regardless of the linguistic group that we
come from. Since the scale of normal communication is expanding from being merely state
and regional to become continental and even planetwide, is it not about time that mankind
started to think about how to resolve the issue of communication between the species as a
whole?
In practice, because there are no effective stru ctures for planetwide political organization to
discuss this general problem, each individual and organization resolves its communicative
needs with the outside world in the manner mo st convenient to them. Due to the economic
and technological importance of English-speaking countries and to their political supremacy
over the last two centuries, this language is considered to be capable of resolving the
present and future intercommunication needs of contemporary societies most adequately. It
is thus being gradually adopted by more and more people and organizations. English is,
without a doubt, the most frequently-learned second language at the moment. It is the
language used most often as a code for relations between different linguistic groups and the
most habitual in international, scientific and commercial communication.
This exponential extension of competence in and use of English, sometimes used
unnecessarily through snobbery or as a sign of 'modernity', is causing an equally dangerous
polarisation in many areas. On the one hand, groups are rallying against the learning and
use of this language due to its condition as an 'imperialist language' (particularly associating
it with current North-American hegemony) while, on the other, elites are adopting it as their

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
3
habitual language and/or passing it on to their children, thinking of the financial and
symbolic advantages that will benefit them. This may spark processes of language shift
within certain social layers, whose behaviour could then be copied by larger groups of
society. As we know, this could lead to the progressive general abandonment of use of the
community’s own language.
However, new language contact may extend beyond English (clearly, the language with the
widest L2 extension) particularly in non-Western areas, to languages of regional hegemony,
within the context of processes of economic inte gration on this level. In Africa, for example,
languages such as Swahili are extending beyond their traditional borders while, in Latin
America, Spanish is putting the finishing touches to its penetration into indigenous linguistic
groups. Arabic is also consolidating itself over a vast area and similar phenomena could also
take place in Asia. Language contact, therefore, is clearly on the increase for more and more
human groups. The great challenge is how to control this contact and how to organise state,
regional and planetwide intercommunication harmoniously on the basis of existing linguistic
diversity.
On top of all these changes, the current globalization process is also party to economic
desperation and a quest for progress. These latter are causing an increase in the movement
of significant groups of people from one linguistic area to another. The potential
consequences of such a movement are significant, depending on the circumstances, for both
the migrants and the receiving societies, particularly if the latter are politically-minoritized
groups or use languages in a small demographic area. Some sociocultural ecosystems that
were already unstable and had a poor equilibrium before the arrival of new groups of
immigrants may be affected by the linguistic evolution of the displaced individuals. New
immigrants may think that they should gear their linguistic behaviour towards the dominant,
majority language, rather than towards the code of the subordinated receiver group or the
group with minority status in that state. It goes without saying that this behaviour can help
increase the demolinguistic minoritization of this group and cause intergroup tension2.
However, migration can also cause the abandonment and loss of a significant degree of
linguistic diversity in cases where the vast majority of its members leave the historical
territory and integrate themselves individually into other societies where they have few
possibilities of continuing to use their code of origin.
There is, therefore, a clear need for all levels of  public authorities, from planetwide to local,
to address the contemporary needs and linguis tic problems of mankind. The issue is no
longer one of scorned 'minorities', but rather of a culturally-diverse species that wants to live
in harmony and solidarity, dealing with any potential problematic situations that could arise.
2. Diversity and intercommunication: a ddressing language contact using the
‘complexity’ perspective
In all likelihood, the most problematic issue raised in the above introduction is how to make
two seemingly contradictory facts compatible: continuity of the linguistic diversity created by
humanity through its diaspora all over the world, and the need for intercommunication
between these groups of linguistically-diverse  individuals in the new – ‘glocal’ – era of
positive re-unification of the species. It seems clear that we should shy away from a
dichotomous view that would force us to resolve the antinomy by opting for one side or the
other of the balance. Mankind is linguistically diverse, and human groups understand this
and support the continuity of this diversity. These same human groups also realise that they
are destined to live together in solidarity on this planet called 'Earth'. The problem may be
the way that we perceive reality, rather than in reality itself. The difficulty lies in thought and
conceptual change, rather than in the notion that it would be impossible to carry out.
The extraordinary tendency of human beings to  think in terms of dichotomies could be the
root of the problem. In the past, and even nowadays, this tendency to think in terms of
                                              
2 See Bastardas Boada, Albert: “Llengua i noves migracions. Les experiències canadenques i la situació a
Catalunya”, Revista de llengua i dret 2002 (in press).

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
4
dichotomies seems to have dominated the view of language contact, thus making it
impossible for all groups concerned to live in more harmonious contentment. The vast
majority of States seem to find it impossible or very difficult to structure themselves
politically in a way that would permit both the continuity of the linguistic life of their
constituent groups and the intercommunication necessary for common living between these
groups. The great majority seem to choose one over the other: they either impose a single
official language for all groups, without recognizing the diversity (and often explicitly against
this), or the existing linguistic groups are recognised but the matter of intercommunication is
not resolved satisfactorily. It is hard to believe that either option can have a future in the
current era of mankind: against the background  of positive growth of the democratic and
egalitarian conscience of human groups and the dignity of each and every one of these,
historical groups that have been thus far subordinated will not sit back and allow the
introduction of solutions condemning them to a reduced linguistic existence when this could
be full and normal. Moreover, a political and linguistic organization that does not consider the
forms of intercommunication between its components in the best possible way is not
sustainable.
Thus, there is no alternative but to explor e imaginatively other forms of political and
linguistic organisation that could make the two objectives above compatible: preserving the
linguistic diversity and dignity of all historical linguistic groups, while ensuring fluent
intercommunication and a feeling of solidarity among our species.
I believe that we might be able to reach some sort of solution if we explore the ideas that
arise from the perspective of 'complexity’, wh ich uses the basic contributions of cognitive,
systemic, ecological, chaological, and/or holistic approximations. In a name, the author I
consider best suited to conceptualizing 'complexity' as applied to human affairs, is French
anthropologist, sociologist and thinker, Edgar Morin. It is through this paradigm that we
learn to recognise the limits of our representa tions of reality and to become aware of the
revision of the categories through wh ich we see the world and our existence 3. Our
representations are dominated by conceptualizations that tend to come basically from the
material world and not from our own mental wo rld. Representations lie and are produced in
the brain/mind, but this does not mean that these representations are automatically
conscious and aware of where they are produced and how.
The representations that have dominated – and still dominate -  Western thinking (which
later spread to many other parts of the world) are based on the properties of material,
physical elements using Aristotelian logic, which is founded on the principle of identity and
exclusion of the third 4. For example, if a place is taken by something, it cannot be occupied
by anything else. This view, when automatically applied to the field of human relations (as is
often the case), means that if a state or group already has a language, it cannot have
another. Secondly, if individuals see themselves as belonging to an 'identity’, they cannot
consider themselves to be members of any other. This is not necessarily the case in the
sociocognitive, mental world. An individual can know several languages and distribute uses
of the languages that they know, and form part  of different categories of identity, within
human societies. The logic of complexity, th erefore, “escapes, in its most fundamental
points, from the binary logic of ‘all or nothing’”5. This vision of things, with more ‘water-type’
or flexible instead of ‘rock-type’ or rigid categories6, can therefore encourage a reformulation
of situations, resulting in new possibilities that need to be explored – along with the
difficulties that this will no doubt entail – with imagination, creativity and rigour.
In all probability, the world and societies would be much simpler if there were only one
language or identity. This would no doubt please the supporters of simplist and simplifying
thought - whom we would all probably be if we  could. However, the fact is that our world,
                                              
3 “Our ideas are not reflections of what is real, but rather translations of what  is real”, Morin, Edgar
(1992): Science avec conscience. Paris: Fayard, p. 242.
4 Morin, Edgar. op. cit. p. 282. See also: De Bono, Edward (1998): Manual de la sabiduría . Barcelona
(Spanish translation of Edward de Bono’s Textbook of Wisdom. New York: Penguin , 1996), Sp. pp. 146-
157, and, by the same author, New Thinking for the New Millenium. London: Penguin, 2000, on the need
to change our way of thinking.
5 Morin, E., op. cit., p. 282.
6 See De Bono, Edward (1994): Water logic. London: Penguin Books.

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
5
our societies, and our individuals are not simple; on the contrary, we can actually be highly
complex. To aid understanding of these non-si mple phenomena, Morin attempts to develop
the paradigm of complexity. Complex thought is understood to be “the union of simplicity
and complexity; it is the union of the simplification processes which are selection,
hierarchization, separation, and reduction, with other contra-processes of communication
and articulation of whatever is dissociated and distinguished; and it shies away from having
to choose the alternative between either reduct ionist thought, which sees only elements, or
globalist thought, which sees only the whole”7. I believe that these postulates for the reform
of thought should form the basis of attempts  to think of principles of the linguistic
organisation of mankind that go beyond traditional dichotomies. We must now think in terms
of ‘and’, instead of ‘or’. After years of thinking in terms of ‘or’, we now need to explore the
linguistic organization of mankind in terms of ‘and’, i.e. from the point of view of complexity
– without excluding either objective. We must ask ourselves about how precisely we can
make both possible: the maintenance and development of the various languages and, at the
same time, the necessary intercommunication.
However, as Morin himself says, ‘complexity’ is a problem word, not a solution word:
“complexity for me is the challenge, not the answer. I am searching for a way of thinking
through complication (that is, through the countless inter-retroactions), through uncertainty
and through contradictions”8. Given that “any objectives we  reach will take us down a new
path, and that any solution will give rise to a new problem” 9, we now need to put our critical
imagination and intellectual creativity into action, using this new perspective, to design the
future, accepting initially contradictory positions and working out how we can fit them all
together in the best and most practical way. The challenge, therefore, lies in making the
effort “not to sacrifice the whole for a single part, or a single part for the whole, but rather to
understand the difficult problem of organization”10.
3. Language contact, equilibrium and shift
When looking at the issue of language, it would seem much simpler to think in terms of ‘and’
(and not ‘or’) in individual competence. Many of us have the experience of knowing – and
using – more than one language. We are ther efore aware that the phenomenon is possible,
with certain costs such as borrowings or mixtures between the codes we dominate; these
are, in any case, not very important and do not challenge the possibility of personal
polyglottism. The perspective of complexity does  become problematic, as we know, at group
and sociopolitical levels. There is a widely-held belief in certain geocultural areas that
generalised social bilingualism usually – or even inevitably - leads to a process of language
shift, i.e. the ‘weaker’ language gradually loses functions whereas the ‘stronger’ language
gains functions, and the process ends with th e abandonment of the group’s own code, i. e.
language death.
Although history reveals a number of cases of this nature that seem to corroborate the
above statement, the evolution is not always as above. As Norbert Elias says, what we may
need to do is at the same time “investigate the nature of this range of possible
transformations and the configuration of factors responsible for the fact that, of all of the
possibilities, only this one is materialized”11. In other words, we need to know more precisely
why the situation evolves in this way and not in any other (such as maintenance of the
language, for example). Once we have a clear idea of the factors and mechanisms, we then
need to find out whether we can intervene in these cases to prevent them from being
affected by shift, ensuring that the recessive languages are maintained and that they
progress. We urgently need to identify the va riables and dynamics of processes of shift, and
to create models that will enable us to design effective possibilities for intervening in
                                              
7 Morin, E. (1990): Introduction à la pensée complexe. Paris: ESF éditeur, p. 135.
8 Morin, E., op. cit., p. 134.
9 Morin, E. (1993): Terre-Patrie. Paris: Éds. du Seuil, p. 201.
10 Morin, E. (1982): Science avec conscience. Paris: Fayard, p. 43.
11 Elias, Norbert (1970): Sociología fundamental. Barcelona: Gedisa, p. 197. (Spanish translation of Was
ist Sociologie? Juventa Verlag Munchen).

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
6
different types of situation, different stages  of development, and the unequal contexts in
which these can occur.
One of the possible paths for exploring processes whereby shift evolves from mass
bilingualism might be to explore the cases where this is not so. The situations that Ferguson
termed 'diglossia' can be used initially to try and shed some light on the problem. How is it
that, despite considerable interlinguistic distances (as with the Swiss-German or Greek
cases) and a clear distribution of 'high' and 'low' functions, these latter are not abandoned
from generation to generation in favour of the 'high' functions? Is this not precisely what
happens in many cases of language shift? How can situations that are so superficially similar
from the point of view of language shift evolve in such crucially different ways? What if mass
bilingualism was a necessary but not a sufficient  condition to explain the evolution towards
the intergenerational abandonment of own varieties? What if, as Norbert Elias said, “when
we are dealing the problem of the need for soci al evolutions, we have to distinguish clearly
and concisely between the statement that B ha s to necessarily follow A and the statement
that A necessarily has to precede B”?12
What then makes situations with a hierarchized distribution of functions between linguistic
varieties that are structurally distant, appear as stable in some cases whereas, in others, the
varieties used in individualised communications tend to be abandoned and replaced by
institutionalised communications 13? Which factors would eventually determine these
outcomes         – diglossia with varying stability (using Ferguson’s concept) versus shift?
Rather than looking at strictly language-based structural divergences, we will probably need
to focus on the socio-cognitive representations of speakers on the linguistic varieties at issue
and, secondly, on the contexts in which these latter are produced and maintained. Let us
clarify that, here, we are not discussing why a given variety is adopted, but rather why the
other is abandoned.
Firstly, unlike the situations described by Ferguson, as regards the political context of
language shift phenomena, the political powers in question very often hope for the result of
language abandonment. In many cases, si nce the very launch of the process of mass
dissemination of the state language (which, for the vast majority of the population, is often
first experienced when learning to read and writ e), the explicit aim is not only to transmit a
general language of intercommunication, but also to eliminate any other systems of linguistic
communication that differ from the model used by the central, supreme political power.
Against this background of subordination and dependence, the population (as it becomes
more and more competent in the newly-acquired State language) may choose to transfer
this language to their children as a basic variety of socialisation, i. e. as a native variety,
thus ending the intergenerational transfer of the group’s own vernacular. The change in
habitual guidelines will need a clear, ideological and/or practical justification and legitimation,
since we are addressing a behaviour that the community clearly values forming part of.
Here, the patriotic discourse of a 'national language', which promotes the notion of a single,
general language for all citizens, can be used. Gradually, therefore, as part of a process of
asymmetrical dissemination among social and geographic groups, this 'national language' will
be adopted as a variety of institutionalized communications; it will then be transferred to
individualized communications by a generation that is already competent in the language.
This generation will transfer the language as native-speakers to the next, which will now be
somewhat unfamiliar with the old vernaculars an d will make this variety, received as the
formal standard (conveniently adapted to colloquial functions), their own habitual language.
On the contrary, the diglossic distribution of functions usually involves the coexistence of
varieties that are perceived as being part of the same 'language'. This is particularly clear
with the historical Greek and Arabic cases. Wh ichever is used, the two varieties have always
been seen as undeniably 'Arabic' or 'Greek'. The standard does not tend to cause issues of
ethnic  identity.
As we said earlier, the varieties are in complementary distribution: the standard variety is
never used in informal oral, individualized communication and the vernaculars are never
                                              
12 Elias, N., op.cit., p. 197.
13 Using the terminology of J. C. Corbeil.

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
7
used in written form and rarely in very formal speech. The official standard is consciously
learned by generation after generation at schools, whereas vernacular varieties are used in
everyday and domestic environments and are th e first varieties acquired by individuals. In
theory therefore, there does not seem to be  room for ethnolinguistic conflict, since the
varieties do not symbolize this type of opposi tion. Therefore, the contrast between varieties
does not seem to offer speakers a negative representation leading them to abandon the
vernaculars in favour of the standard in informal, everyday communication. In fact, the
opposite appears to take place.
Basically, then, the reason for the relative stability in these cases of diglossic distribution lies
in the political and cognitive dimension: none of the cases usually analysed are situations of
political subordination, such as minoritized communities. The perception of dependence, with
its negative undertones, and as a result, self-denigration with the adoption of foreign cultural
elements as the main reference for behaviour and values, do not need to occur. It therefore
seems obvious that intergenerational shift is not caused by the simple facts of
bilingualization and the asymmetrical distribution of functions, but rather by the political and
economic context in which the bilingualization occurs and the meanings and representations
associated with it by its protagonists.14
In many cases, the root of the problem lies in these significant representations of the
situation and, specifically, in the evaluations and expectations for each linguistic variety at
issue. The functional equilibrium that would allow intergenerational reproduction of the
situation collapses if individuals arrive at the conclusion that, all in all, their children would
benefit more from the transfer of their L2, rather than their L1, because they see more
advantages in the L2 (often linked to socioeconomic aspects and political and cultural
prestige). When overt, formal prestige has greater importance than 'covert' prestige – as it
has termed by some authors – individuals may decide to change their child’s language. We
therefore need to look at the context - the sociopolitical and economic ecosystem - for the
factors that may have led to this decision to abandon the intergenerational transfer of the
group’s historical language.
In certain lights, it may appear that this abandonment is strongly influenced by
socioeconomic factors, particularly with regard to expectations of usefulness as a language of
work and, overall, to the positive nature of  the language entering the general process of
'modernization'. These contrast with negative factors associated with the traditional
language, regarded as a variety linked to the past - a pre-modern period that needs to be
transcended. However, there are also important examples of communities from
underdeveloped economies that have been modernized entirely, without losing their
language; quite the opposite, their language has been promoted, encoded and extended as
one that is appropriate and functionally pres ent in all the communications of an advanced,
contemporary society. Therefore, economic aspects alone can sometimes explain the desire
and concern of individuals for knowing the most useful languages in these cases, but it is
more difficult for them to explain the abandonment of the group language. At any rate, this
phenomenon must occur in a more general context of minoritization (specially at the political
level), leading the community to lose its own structures which could guide the process of
modernisation from its own points of view and favour its interests instead of those of the
politically-dominant group. (The other important variable to explain abandonment is
demolinguistic mixing, whereby significant migratory movements, particularly from the
politically-dominant group/s, cause the alloctonous variety to gain ground, even in everyday
interpersonal communication, while the native language loses speakers and functions).
                                              
14 See Bastardas Boada, Albert (1997): “Substitution linguistique versus diglossie dans la perspective de
la planétarisation”, in: Bouchard, G. & Y. Lamonde (dir.): La nation dans tous ses états. Le Québec en
comparaison. Montreal/Paris: Harmattan, pp. 111-129. See in Catalan, “Manteniment diglòssic i
substitució lingüística: notes per a una continuïtat de la linguodiversitat”, in: Homenatge a Jesús Tuson .
Barcelona: Empúries, 1999, pp. 26-32. On-line versions are also available in French and Catalan at
DiversCité Langues http://www.teluq.uquebec.ca/diverscite, vol. II (1997).

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
8
4. New principles for a new historical era
Political action and representations and discourses on language diversity, political integration
and intercommunication are ther efore primordial. One of the first aspects we need to study
with world authorities is how to overcome, through discourse, the dichotomies that restrict
us, and as we said earlier, promote the search for new principles and ways of looking at
situations of language contact. As regards the traditional criteria for the organisation of
plurilingualism, for example, I believe that we  may need to look beyond the principles of
'territoriality' and 'personality' for the more complex situations that so require. Despite their
obvious advantages, both principles tend to pr esuppose that individuals are monolingual and
cannot, in principle, resolve the problem of intercommunication. How then can principles
such as these resolve the construction of a European sociocultural space in practice? How are
we to understand each other, setting aside simple, formal institutions with multiple
translation systems, if we all want to remain functionally monolingual? How would the
application of a principle of 'personality' be possible for so many languages in such a wide
space? We may well have to look elsewhere for the answer.
I suggest, therefore, that the search focuses on  the study of the application of the principle
called 'subsidiarity' (already present in European nomenclature) in the field of linguistic
communication. We could adapt this political and administrative principle into a language
policy principle that, generally-speaking, establishes the criteria that 'whatever a 'local'
language can do, a 'global' language should not’. That is to say, we would allow – and
promote – the effective, mass knowledge of other languages, giving functional pre-eminence
where possible to the language of each histor ically-constructed linguistic group. So-called
'foreign' languages would be used for external contact (which would occur increasingly more
often) but local, everyday functions would be clearly allocated to the own languages of each
linguistic group.
This reserve of functions for the 'local' la nguages of each group must be clear and
transparent to prevent the existing polyglottiza tion from leading to the abandonment of the
code with less communicative scope. Thus, in addition to the principles of polyglottization
and subsidiarity, we need to incorporate the principle of ‘specific’ or ‘exclusive’ functions for
'local' languages, which could be overpowered by  the bigger languages. Clearly, there would
be a strong, important nucleus of reserved functions to be performed habitually in the group
language and not in any other. The exclusive functions of the group code must not be limited
to informal, oral communication; rather, they would have to incorporate the maximum
possible formal, written functions to ensure that the representations and evaluations of
individuals did not favour the other extragroup languages. This would involve the creation, in
the words of the Quebecois linguist, Angéline Martel, of a type of 'positive diglossia'. I am led
to believe that this type of success is possible, not only by cases such as Ferguson’s
aforementioned diglossias or by other African multilingual situations, but also by situations
such as that of Luxembourg. The languages of this small European State are organised
around a certain type of functional distribution enabling the continued polyglottization of
individuals and the clear maintenance of the group language15.
Correlatively to polyglottization, subsidiarity and exclusive functions, all levels of political
authorities should supervise the prevention  of a trend that could well take place - abusive
use by bigger languages. If this ecological equilibrium that we need to construct is to be
successful, the big languages must not want to occupy more space and functions than is
their right, by taking advantage of the mass polyglottization of individuals. They cannot
abusively invade local areas and leave the use of group languages with no possibilities, or at
a severe disadvantage, in functions that are very important for evaluating languages, such
as those usually dominated by these great codes. Some type of general regulation must be
established; this should be based on the princi ple of subsidiarity and respect for the dignity
                                              
15The possibility of non-hierarchized, functional langua ge distribution could also  be an interesting and
fitting solution for cases with two (or more?) linguist ic groups that are more or less equal in numbers
where it is difficult to agree which language should benefit from the principle of subsidiarity in favour of
the local language. Non-asymmetrical, functional specialisation can involve each group knowing and
using the language of the other, which can help balance the situation and resolve the potential conflict of
this type of context.

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
9
and stability of all linguistic groups produced throughout history. Without international
organisations with authority over these aspects, it could be very difficult to maintain a fair
and adequate equilibrium. The responsibility  of current, planet-wide organisations – and
those in urgent need of creation - is extremely important and decisive.
Promoting the effective polyglottization of individuals also involves taking new decisions that
must be studied and debated, as well as the need for research and effective imagination in
methods and strategies for learning second languages. One of the first decisions that must
be taken is which second language or languages need/s to be learnt; such a decision
obviously depends on the language/s we adop t at the various levels of communication -
general or planet-wide, regional or continental, and local. As we are all aware, many
international organisations and countries have already taken decisions on this aspect that
clearly tend to favour the adoption of English,  as we pointed out earlier, although often in
conjunction with other codes. I do not believe that this aspect should not go unquestioned,
simply to become an inevitable and irreversible fact that irrationally feeds off contemporary
North-American hegemony. Mankind as a whole needs to ask itself what it wants to do,
communicatively-speaking. What is best for us? To continue spreading the knowledge of a
language of a specific human group (which clearly asymmetrically favours those with this
language as their L1), or to focus on a language of intercommunication that is not the L1 of
any human group? What is best for the continuity of linguistic diversity? To continue learning
the language of a group or series of groups that are hegemonic at this point in time, or to
think about adopting a new language that belongs to nobody, for all of mankind? Many
people may think that these questions have already been answered de facto  by reality.
However, I sincerely believe that our species cannot adopt decision of this importance unless
the organisations that represent us and the citizens themselves debate, deliberate, evaluate
and finally give their verdict on the issue.
English-speaking countries and individuals clearly benefit from the current situation and,
depending on the conditions, social development can lead to increasingly more individuals
imitating native English-speakers and, as we said earlier, adopting English as their habitual
language and as the L1 of their children. At th e moment, a product in English – even if it is
not only local, but also localist – is immediately an 'international' product, whereas the same
product in another language has a restricted circulation. Clearly, if a neutral code that is not
the L1 of any group was adopted, people would be less likely to see a code of
intercommunication as an L1, thus guaranteeing further the level of conservation of historical
linguistic diversity. This would also make humans more equal in terms of their initial
language competencies, since everybody would have to learn the language. Moreover, as we
saw in Ferguson’s diglossias, complementary distribution contributes to maintenance: the
formal variety is not habitually used in everyday communication and therefore rarely
becomes an L1.
However, here we may face problems such as the linguistic distance between the languages
of each group and the structure of the langua ge of intercommunication that is finally
adopted. How can we create a neutral code th at will be equal for everybody? Perhaps the
issue is not that easy to solve (as we have seen in India, for example), and the debates
between the different linguistic groups may make it impossible to ever reach the point of
adopting this neutral code. In that case, the continuity and expansion of English would be
guaranteed, at least until some other power in the future decided to challenge  that language
and try to impose its own.
If the prevailing solution was continuity of the international use of a language belonging to a
pre-existing human group, I think that we would then need to think about introducing some
clear counterweights, not only as regards clear regulation and the establishment of an
authority to supervise abusive usage, but even  'taxes' for usage; the resources obtained in
this way could then be used to benefit languages with more difficulties. The exportation of
English knowledge and the fact that products written in that language can encompass a
significant part of the world market provides an enormous amount of financial benefit for this
group of countries, particularly for Great Britai n and the United States. The sharing of these
benefits and returning them to other linguistic groups is not too far-fetched an idea to
imagine it becoming a reality in the immediate future as planetwide integration advances.

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
10
5. Immediate priorities for the general maintenance of linguistic diversity
Without setting aside the reflection and action required to shape the future of the linguistic
communication of humanity, we need to concentrate on more immediate problems and try to
act in coordination on smaller scales, which are, for the moment, more often decisive.
International group action is required both by the organisations common to humanity at this
moment in time and by the most local of public authorities. These must make people fully
aware of the linguistic diversity crisis and undertake action at every level of government to
change the current, inadequate conditions. However, although we can conceptualize the
phenomenon of language contact as a unit, the situations and stages of development of the
various cases can be very different, and thus require very different types of action.
Currently, we find contact ranging from that of the language of an important group (i.e. with
solid demographic expansion, economically-developed, with full political sovereignty) that
uses English as a technical and scientific interlanguage, to that of a group with few
individuals that is economically and politically minoritized, in constant contact with the
language of the dominant group in all of thes e aspects. It is evident that the problem of
diversity is aggravated as we near the lower end of this continuum of situations, i. e. cases
with maximum political, economic, demogr aphic, educational, mass media and even
ideological subordination. One of the most ur gent aspects that needs to be studied and
solved, therefore, is knowing exactly which polici es to apply in the diverse situations all over
the planet.
By way of example and for provisional study, we  need to at least distinguish between these
different situations (by combining variables such as group demographic volume, level of
political subordination, level of economic development, everyday contact with other groups,
and representations of the situation16):
Demographically smaller groups that are politically subordinated, economically
underdeveloped, with somewhat negative self-representations and that are socially-mixed
with other group/s with greater relative power or that are higher in numbers.
Smaller, politically-subordinated groups that are not or very scarcely mixed in their everyday
social territory.
Smaller groups that are not or very scarcely mixed, with a certain level of political autonomy
and official and public recognition of their language.
Small to medium-sized groups with a certain level of political autonomy and official and
public recognition of their language but which have an intense, daily social coexistence with
another group or other groups that also have official recognition.
Medium-sized, politically-independent groups.
Semi-large, politically-independent groups.
Large, politically-independent groups on a continental or supracontinental scale.
These ‘structural’ situations can also be found in diverse stages of development,
characterised by the various levels of the population that uses and/or is competent in the
language within the group itself, and by different representations of the value and usefulness
of this code. Given the dynamic nature of the situations, different political action is required
depending on the phase of each group, particularly in clear cases of language shift in
movement. Intervention in a case where only a quarter of the population habitually uses the
code will differ from that used in a situation whereby three quarters habitually use the
language. Similarly, an attempt to change the linguistic behaviour of groups with positive
representations about their language will, at least initially, require a different type of action
than a situation of a group in which the majority have negative associations about their own
language.
Ideally, we should have already arrived to a theoretical agreement about the most effective
action for each type of situation. To leave behind the study of the discussion and theorisation
of the values of diversity and to put these into practice, we would need to be able to make a
                                              
16 Rigorous combination of variables would produc e more categories, enabling us to widen the
categorisation.

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
11
clear decision about which policies are required in which type of situation at which stage of
development and in which historical contexts.  I believe that this is the important issue that
will guide our research, creative activity an d scientific talks over the coming years. We
urgently need to fully understand the mechanis ms of the processes and to construct models
of action for each type of problem.
It is of the utmost importance that organisations such as UNESCO (or even the UN) increase
their awareness of current linguistic diversity problems, particularly for the impact that their
decisions could have on continental and, particularly, state public authorities. In fact, without
a clear world policy (which includes the acceptance and dissemination of the appropriate
ideological perspectives and the provision of necessary financial aid), it will be very difficult
in the current state of affairs for the governments of many of the countries undergoing
linguistic crises to see the need or opportunity  to intervene. As their elite groups have been
educated with European-style ideology, they tend to apply in their own countries schemes
that history has proven to be wrong and that are now being revised in Europe. Moreover,
due to a lack of resources for carrying out policies of asymmetrical bilingualization in a
European language, these countries create a ga lloping language shift between the elites in
favour of the foreign language (often that of  the ex-coloniser). Moreover, they also impede
the democratic participation of most of the population because it never reaches a competent
level in the official language, and this causes an extremely high level of legal
defencelessness.
Against this backdrop, it is not at all strange that parents that are able to, decide to abandon
their own language and communicate with their children in the offici al language. Therefore,
instead of promoting the codification of native  languages, immediate literacy of populations
and use of these codes by civil servants and state organisations (leaving the bi- or
multilingualization of individuals for a later date), these governments reproduce an outdated
nation-state view and, in doing so, perpetuate  state-control by the leading classes, since a
lack of knowledge of the official language prohibits the majority of the population access to
the most important positions of government  and the civil service. The mechanism is
therefore perverse and can cause an imag e of rejection of one’s own code and an
exaggerated evaluation of the of f i c i a l  l a n g u a g e  i n  q u e s t i o n .  A n  i n v e r s e  p o l i c y  o f  o f f i c i a l
multilingualism would allow different linguistic groups to take part in democratic life and the
dignification, usefulness and, hence, mainte nance of their own codes, besides to the
bilingualization or polyglottization of the population in the languages of intercommunication
that are required. The ideological line presented is, however, prevalent for the time-being in
most African states and Pacific territories and, albeit with significant differences, in certain
areas of South America and in other parts of the world.
International organizations must inform these and other countries of the need and justice of
basing their linguistic organisation on the perspective of complexity and subsidiarity, within
the framework of a new type of ethics. This new type of ethics  must be based on an
ecological17 vision of sociolinguistic situations in that they should not only focus on the
official and standard level, but also on the series of factors that determine the situation and
its evolution. Thus, we can search for a balancing, compensatory action that favours the
proportionally-weaker linguistic groups. As complex thought postulates, each living being and
each element must be inserted into its cont ext, seen dynamically and in terms of its
ecosystem, from the point of view of eco-self-causality and self-eco-organisation 18. Rather
than searching for equality, therefore, we will need to search for fairness, in order to
guarantee a sociocultural ecosystem that favours the stability of linguistic diversity.
Alongside the traditional conceptualization in terms of ‘rights’, compensatory functions will
need to be introduced into cases that so require; this conceptualization is much wider and
more appropriate for solving language contact problems, particularly where there is a great
deal of asymmetry between groups.
                                              
17 See Bastardas Boada, Albert (ed.): Diversitat/s. Llengües, espècies i ecologies . Barcelona: Empúries,
2002 (in press), and also “Transdisciplinary explorations for a socioecology of languages: From biological
to linguistic diversity”, Estudios de sociolingüística 3:1 (June 2002).
18 Morin, E. (1982): Science avec conscience. Paris: Fayard, pp. 114, 186 and 296. See also: Bastardas,
Albert (1996): Ecologia de les llengües. Medi, contacte, i dinàmica sociolingüística. Barcelona: Proa.

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
12
7. Synthesis and conclusion: some principl es and values for peace and linguistic
justice throughout the planet
To sum up, and to help to round off the discussion and reflection, I will repeat some of the
principles on the linguistic organisation of mankind, developed throughout the essay and
dealt with in earlier research19:
One. The ideologies and conceptual landscapes we need to think the problem must take into
consideration the so far existing sociolinguistic experience if we are to avoid a linguistic
organisation of the planet based on a hierarchical and asymmetrical structure between the
language or languages of intercommunication and the remaining codes. Equalitarian
coexistence must be based on the correct dist ribution of functions, using the principle of
‘subsidiarity’, which would introduce the norm that everything that can be done by local
languages, does not need to be performed by a more general code of intercommunication.
The main idea would be adequate protection of the own ecosystemic spaces of each
language.
Two. One of the guides for applying the first principle must be that being sufficiently
competent in a code of intercommunication do es not do away with the right or need of
human linguistic communities to use their codes fully and in the maximum possible local
functions. The indiscriminate application of the ‘principle of competence’ will always favour
the code that is most generally shared (that of intercommunication), which could take
functions from other languages, endangering their existence and, hence, activating
unnecessary conflicts that are hard to resolve.
Three. Since human beings can represent reality arriving at conclusions that do not depend
directly on reality, but rather on narrative and interpretative configurations created by
humans themselves, in addition to the practical instructions for organising linguistic
communication, public authorities must disseminate an ideology that clearly favours diversity
and linguistic equality. Therefore, they need to promote the self-dignity of marginalized
linguistic groups and offset wide-spread popu lar representations such as the ideology of
'linguistic superiority' or phenomena such as the self-perception of inferiority to external
'reference groups or languages' considered as models to be assimilated.
Four. Preference should be given to methodologies for developing communicative
competence in the code of intercommunication to ensure a sufficiently high level for the
diverse generations of individuals that will acquire this language. We should also ensure that
inadequate results do not lead to parents (able to do so) using the code of
intercommunication as their child’s L1, instead of the native variety of the group. Clearly,
this development of practical knowledge of the language or languages of interrelations
should not prejudice the development and use of local languages.
Five. Equal attention should be paid to the study of cases whereby a linguistic group has
frequent social contact with a considerable number of individuals whose L1 is a code of
intercommunication, as it is highly likely that the predominant trend will be to use the latter
as a habitual norm; this would have potential repercussions on the intergenerational
reproduction of the other language if the populations integrated socially. In these cases, the
mechanism of mixed marriage can unintentionally  reduce the index of generational transfer
of local codes considerably if the population is not made aware and if linguistic diversity is
not fostered within the family unit itself through the principle of 'one parent = one language',
in cases where this is possible and necessary.
We are, therefore, faced with a fascinating task of research and organisation, requiring
considerable imagination. We urgently need to organise ourselves to inform, persuade and
convince the heads of world organisations, state governments and other public organisations
to study how these principles can be applied and to put them into practice. Furthermore, it is
                                              
19 See Note n. 14, and: Bastardas Boada, Albert (2000): “De la ‘normalització’ a la ‘diversitat’ lingüística:
cap a un enfocament global del contacte de llengües”, Revista de llengua i dret, 34, pp. 151-168.

Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística
http://cultura.gencat.net/llengcat/noves
Teoria i metodologia. Estiu 2002
13
both urgent and necessary to carry out in-depth research on the various aspects concerned
(politics, law, pedagogy, philosophy, socio-ec onomics, etc.), from the point of view of
ecological complexity, bearing in mind that, as Morin says, “political action itself, more so
than complex knowledge, depends on the strategy, on the art”20.
The extension of perspectives of complexity and their application to very diverse fields is one
of the current needs of the entire planet. It may be necessary to relocate this reconstructed
thinking in the widest context of a crisis of civilisation leading us to re-think fragmentary and
reductionist views of the world in favour of representations that are closer to the reality of
human facts and values based on ecological vision, sustainability and universal fraternity.
The physicist, Fritjof Capra, maintains that a change in thinking is not enough: our values
must change too. Both ways of thinking and values must combine in equal measures the
trends of self-assertion and integration, which are, as Capra says, basic in all living systems.
“Neither of them is intrinsically good or bad. What is good, or healthy, is a dynamic balance;
what is bad, or unhealthy, is imbalance – ov er-emphasis of one tendency and neglect of the
other”21. Capra therefore suggests dealing wi th the columns of the table below
complementarily, in order to rectify, particularly in Western culture, the predominance of
assertive thought and values at the expense of integrative ones:
Thinking Values
Self-assertive Integrative Self-assertive Integrative
Rational
Analysis
Reductionist
Linear
Intuitive
Synthesis
Holistic
Nonlinear
Expansion
Competition
Quantity
Domination
Conservation
Cooperation
Quality
Partnership
This change in paradigm does seem urgent because it is clearly coherent with the main
problems of modern societies. Now that we are getting to know ourselves better genetically
too and that we are sure (if we still weren’t convinced) that humans are a unique species and
that the genome of other species is not so different, perhaps we can enter another planetary
era with more solidarity between the divers e cultural groups and the other species with
which we share the biosphere. Biologically and linguistically, as Edward O. Wilson says, “soon
we must look deep within ourselves and decide what we wish to become”22.
Albert Bastardas i Boada
albert@fil.ub.es
University Centre for Sociolinguistics and Communication (CUSC) , and
Department for General Linguistics of the University of Barcelona
                                              
20 Morin, E., op. cit., p. 307.
21 Capra, Fritjof (1997): The web of life. Hammersmith, London: HarperCollins Publ., pp. 9-10.
22 Wilson, Edward O. (1999): Consilience. The unity of knowledge. London: Abacus, p. 309.