gl
es
en
gl
es
en
UDC
Faculty of Philology Faculty of Philology Faculty Bachelor's degrees Master's degrees PhD Research Quality System International Students Contact
Faculty of Philology
Faculty
Bachelor's degrees
Master's degrees
PhD
Research
Quality System
International Students
Contact
Faculty of Philology
>>
Faculty
Bachelor's degrees
Master's degrees
PhD
Research
Quality System
International Students
Contact
Faculty of Philology
Faculty | Bachelor's degrees | Master's degrees | PhD | Research | Quality System | International Students
FAQ · Incomming students (Erasmus, SICUE, etc.)
Academic aspects
After arriving
How is my timetable?
Group adscription
1st year subjects
2nd year subjects
3rd and 4th years subjects
Timetables
What do I do if I have a schedule clash?
What do I do if I am not in the group adscription lists?
Can I change teaching group?
Academic calendar, dates to keep in mind
When are the exams?
What do I do if two exams overlap?
What are the teaching guides?
What is the Campus Virtual / Moodle?
How does the UDC and the faculty communicate?
How can I find a teacher?
Do I have a tutor at the UDC?
Where?
Request for information on academic matters
Handing over documentation, forms, etc.
Ask about the location of facilities, teachers' offices, etc.
Lost and Found
Notify malfunctions
Faculty services and facilities
Administration
Concierge
Library
Group work facilties
Cafeteria, self-service vending machines and lunch area
Questions, complaints, suggestions, compliments and claims
Generic form
Questions, requests for information and suggestions
Can I make a claim for the assessment I have received?
Who does what in the faculty
International relations, Erasmus+, mobility with Spanish universities
Vicedean for infrastructures, services, environment
Vicedean for quality, procedures, use of Galician language
Vicedean for library and culture
Certificates (not transcripts)
Collecting and delivery of documentation
Claims, complaints, suggestions, others
Attention to diversity, adaptations
Coordination of BA degrees and master programmes
Internships
UDC Health Programs in Philology
E-learning
PhD Programs, Departamento de Letras
Governing bodies
Academic aspects
After arriving
You should go as soon as possible to the ORI (International Office), to justify your arrival and to deal with the paperwork.
The ORI is situated in the Casa do Lagar, Elviña Campus (down the hill, bus stop next to the UDC stadium).
➜ Casa do Lagar in Google Maps
You will need an appointment.
➜ Make an appointment
How is my timetable ?
The following should be considered:
- Students in the 1st and 2nd years and in the Degree in English are divided into groups.
➜ Group adscription
- Some optional subjects of the Degree in Spanish also have two teaching groups.
- Each group has a different class schedule
➜ 1st year subjects ➜ 2nd year subjects ➜ 3rd and 4th year subjects ➜ Timetables
Group adscription
- Each student is assigned to a group, identified by a letter (A, B, C, D).
- The adscription is published on the faculty website, in the space for each degree:
Degree in Spanish | Degree in Galician and Portuguese | Degree in English
- Group adscription lists are updated after each enrolment period.
➜ What do I do if I am not on the group adscription lists?
1st year subjects
All 1st year subjects are term subjects, i.e. they are taught from September to December or from the late January to May (➜ Academic calendar ).
1st year courses have the following weekly structure:
- 2 hours of lectures (“sesiones expositivas”) - 2 interactive sessions of 1 hour each
The lectures are joint:
- on the one hand, for groups A and B - and on the other hand, for groups C and D.
Each student must attend the lecture and the two interactive sessions per week corresponding to his/her group.
2nd year subjects
Second year subjects have the following weekly structure (with two exceptions):
- 2 hours of lectures - 2 interactive sessions of 1 hour each
The lecture sessions are joint:
- on the one hand, for groups A and B, - on the other hand, for groups C and D.
The lecture and the two weekly interactive sessions corresponding to each group must be attended.
Exceptions Spanish Literature (Literatura Española) and Galician Literature (Literatura Galega) have a special distribution, with 90-minute lecture sessions throughout the course.
3rd and 4th year subjects
Compulsory subjects (taught from 8.30 to 15.30) have the following weekly structure:
- 1 lecture session (“sesión expositiva”) of 90 minutes - 2 interactive sessions of 1 hour, which can be taken in a single 120-minute session.
In the Degree in English there are two interactive teaching groups (A and B). The assigned one must be attended (see group adscription lists ).
Elective subjects are taught in the afternoons (16.30-20.30) and have the following weekly structure:
- 1 lecture session of 1 hour - 1 interactive session of 1 hour
Some electives have two interactive teaching groups (A and B). You must go to the assigned group (see group adscription lists [ Degree in English ]).
Timetables
Available on the website of each degree programme:
Degree in Spanish | Degree in Galician and Portuguese | Degree in English
Master in Literature, Culture and Diversity | Master in Applied Linguistics | Master in Advanced English Studies
What do I do if I have a schedule clash?
a) If it solves the issue, request a change of group  (➜ Can I change teaching group? )
b) Change your learning agreement. Contact your tutor at home and at the UDC (➜ Do I have a tutor at the UDC? ).
What do I do if I am not on the group adscription lists ?
If you are an incoming student (Erasmus, SICUE or any other program), please, consider that processing your learning agreement takes some time. Don’t hesitate to ask for the adscription to a group even if the enrolment or changes in the learning agreement have not yet been completed.
Please, note that groups are only assigned for subjects where interactive sessions are divided into groups.
There is a form in English to ask for the adscription.
Can I change teaching group ?
Yes. There are some conditions and, if it is due to overlapping timetables, there is also a period of 10 days from the start of each term.
Regulations and application forms (Normativa e formularios de solicitude)
Academic calendar , dates to have in mind
Academic calendar for BA degrees
When are the exams?
There are three periods:
- First term subjects: 7 - 24 January 2025
- Second semester subjects: 19 May - 5 June 2025
- Second chance, for all subjects: 19 June - 11 July 2025
Details available on the website of each degree programme:
Degree in Spanish | Degree in Galician and Portuguese | Degree in English
➜ What do I do if two exams overlap?
What do I do if two exams overlap ?
You can apply to change the date of the exam of the subject of the higher course.
All details, as well as the application form, can be found in the Regulation on changing dates of exams due to overlapping ( Normativa de cambio de exámenes por solapamiento ).
What are the teaching guides ?
Each subject is described in a document that includes the syllabus, the assessment method , the tasks, conditions for passing the subject, etc.
The teaching guides are required to be followed by both teaching staff and students.
It is therefore very important to be familiar with each teaching guide.
Access to de teaching guides:
Degree in Spanish
Degree in Galician and Portuguese
Degree in English
Master's Degree in Advanced English Studies
Master's Degree in Applied Linguistics
Master's Degree in Literature, Culture and Diversity
Changes to the learning agreement
Erasmus students have the first month of the autumn semester (until 5th October) to make any changes to their Learning Agreement for the first semester. Similarly, at the start of the spring semester (30th January) students have until 2nd March to make changes to their LA.
You will need the signature of the Faculty coordinator (Dr. Elizabeth Woodward); please make an appointment for signing such changes writing to mobilidade.filoloxia@udc.es
If you need advice on which modules to choose, please consult the Exchange programme tutor corresponding to your home institution .
What is the Campus Virtual / Moodle?
It is the teaching platform of the UDC. You should consult it regularly.
https://udconline.udc.gal
How does the UDC and the faculty communicate?
The faculty, the UDC and the teaching staff will disseminate information through these means:
Faculty website: www.udc.es/filo
General website of the UDC: www.udc.es
Institutional e-mail . Each incoming student will be assigned a UDC email address. Please note this is the only one that teaching staff will use, and the only one which transmits messages through the Campus VIrtual. It is very important to access the UDC e-mail frequently.
Virtual Campus (also called Moodle) ➜ What is the Campus Virtual / Moodle?
Teams (the video call/videoconferencing tool))
Notice boards (ground floor foyer and in front of the administration, classroom doors and teachers' offices)
How do I find a teacher ?
Almost all teachers’ offices are situated in the building perpendicular to the main building. This annex building is accessible from the car parking or through a corridor on the first floor (close to classroom 1.6).
Their e-mail addresses are also in the teaching guides.
Tutoring hours
Telephones, e-mail, offices
Do I have a tutor at UDC ?
Exchange students are assigned an tutor depending on their home university.
Exchange program tutors
Questions, complaints, suggestions, compliments and claims
Standard form
There is a form for transmitting questions, complaints, suggestions and congratulations to any body of the UDC. It is accessible at the bottom of any official university web page (link Suggestions / Sugerencias ).
This form should not be used for subject qualification claims ; these claims are regulated in the “Rules for assessment, review and claims for the qualifications of BA and master's degree studies” ( Normas de evaluación, revisión y reclamación de las calificaciones de los estudios de grado y máster universitario )
➜ Can I claim for the evaluation received?
Questions, requests for information and suggestions
It is advisable to go to the ➜ administration or directly to the responsible person (➜ Who does what in the faculty ).
Can I make a claim for the assessment I have received?
Claims for the assessment of subjects are regulated in the “Rules for assessment, review and claims for the qualifications of BA and master's degree studies” ( Normas de evaluación, revisión y reclamación de las calificaciones de los estudios de grado y máster universitario ), articles 27 and following.
There you will find the reasons for which it is possible to make a complaint and how to do it.
Faculty services
Administration
Located on the ground floor. Opening times: 9.00-14.00, Monday to Friday
Registration and changes to registration for master's degrees, applications, certificates, etc.
Information on procedures related to registration, recognition of other studies, etc.
✉ administracion.filoloxia@udc.es ✆ (+34) 881 01 17 14   /  881 01 17 15   /  881 01 17 17
Concierge
• Located on the ground floor, between the entrance and the library (see location ).
• General information:
· Location of different faculty spaces, offices, rooms... · How to find a member of the teaching staff (or see Cómo localizar a un profesor/una profesora ) · Lost and found
• For notifying issues, especially about equipment
✉ conserxaria.filoloxia@udc.es ✆ (+34) 881 01 17 13
Library
115 000 books at your disposal. You can take up to 3 copies home.
20 000 electronic subscription publications
Group work spaces
250 individual work and study spaces
Reprographic and scanning self-service
Library's website: www.udc.es/biblioteca.fil/
FAQ about the library
Location
✉ biblioteca.fil@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 17 12
Group work facilties
Work room (first floor, opposite administration for the Tourism Faculty)
2 work rooms for small groups (in the library; ask staff on duty there)
Cafeteria, self-service vending machines and lunch area
The Faculty has its own cafeteria, selling some products, and providing a daily menu at officially controlled prices.
On the 1st floor there are self-service machines for hot and cold drinks and snacks.
On the right of these machines there is a space with tables and a microwave for anyone to use.
Where?
Request for information on academic matters
Your exchange tutor at the UDC: Exchange program tutors
Vicedean for International Relations
➜ Administración
Handing over documentation, forms, etc.
➜ Administración
(Except when the required office is indicated as the the Dean’s secretary: ➜ Secretaría del decanato ).
Ask about the location of facilities, teachers' offices, etc.
Ask the concierges, at the entrance (➜ Conserjería ).
Lost and Found
Acude a la ➜ conserjería .
Notificar averías, mal funcionamento de algo
Si piensas que es de solución inmediata, hazlo saber en la ➜ conserjería .
Si consideras que es algo cuyo funcionamiento debería ser modificado, contacta con la vicedecana responsable de infraestructuras y servicios .
Who does what in the faculty
International relations, Erasmus+, mobility with Spanish universities
Emma Lezcano Vicedean
✉ mobilidade.filoloxia@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 011 894
Vicedean for infrastructures, services, environment
Marta Lago Méndez Vicedean
✉ vicedecanato.infraestruturas.filoloxia@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 011 895
Vicedean for quality, procedures, use of Galician language
Fernando González Muñoz Vicedean
✉ vicedecanato.calidade.filoloxia@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 47 09
Vicedean for library and culture
Marta Lago Méndez Vicedean and director of the library
✉ cultura.filoloxia@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 011 712
Certificates (not transcripts)
Esperanza Acín Villa Secretary of the Faculty of Philology
✉ secretaria.filoloxia@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 18 34
Collection and delivery of documentation
Silvia Pintos Señoráns Secretary of the Dean's office
✉ secretaria.decanato.filoloxia@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 18 33
Claims, complaints, suggestions, others
Félix Córdoba Rodríguez Dean
✉ decanato.filoloxia@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 18 38   /   (+34)  881 01 18 33
Attention to diversity, adaptations
Rosario Mascato Profesora encargada de atención a la diversidad
✉ rosario.mascato@udc.gal ✉ pat.filoloxia@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 18 61
Coordination of BA degrees and master programmes
Información directa sobre las titulaciones y personas a las que transmitir comentarios, sugerencias...
Coordinator of the Degree in Spanish
Coordinator of the Degree in English
Coordinator of the Degree in Galician and Portuguese
Coordinator of the Master's degree in Applied Linguistics (MILA)
Coordinator of the Master's degree in Literature, Culture and Diversity (MLCD)
Coordinator of the Master's degree in Advanced English Studies (iMAES)
Coordinator of the Master's degree in Teaching Spanish as a Foreign or Second Language (MELE)
Internships
Miguel Alonso Giráldez Profesor responsable de prácticas extracurriculares
✉ miguel.giraldez@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 18 43
UDC Health Programs in Philology
Emma Lezcano Representante de la facultad en la Comisión de Apoyo a la UDC Saudable
✉ emma.lezcano@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 18 28
E-learning
Carlos Vizcaíno Fernández Profesor asesor en teleformación
✉ carlos.vizcaino@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 47 65
PhD Programs, Departamento de Letras
Administración Ground floor
✉ negociado.filoloxia@udc.gal ✆ (+34)  881 01 18 36
Goberning bodies
Junta de Facultad
Comisiones delegadas de la Junta de Facultad
Equipo decanal
Otras figuras de coordinación
Faculty of Philology
>>
Faculty
Bachelor's degrees
Master's degrees
PhD
Research
Quality System
International Students
Contact
Universidade da Coruña
Location
Telephones
Suggestions
Contact with citizens
Sitemap
Legal notice
Campus Industrial
Transparency
Corporate identity
Office for Gender Equality
Contractor profile
Students virtual secretary
News site
Internal channel of information
University Library
Instagram
YouTube
Linkedin
Calendarios
App Store
Google Play
RSS