TEMPLATE 3: INTERNAL REVIEW
Name Organisatin  nder review: 
Universidade da Cir ña (UDC)
Organisatin’s cintact details: 
Prif. Salvadir Naya Fernández
Vice-Rectir fir Science Pilicy, Research and Transfer (vpcit@ dc.es)
SUBMISSION  DATE TO THE EUROPEAN  COMMISSION : 15/05/2017 ( RESUBMISSION )…..…..……
1. ORGANISATIONAL  INFORMATION
Please privide an  pdate if the key fg res fir yi r irganisatin. Fig res marked * are cimp lsiry.
STAFF & STUDENTS FTE
Total researchers = staff fellowship holdersf bursary holdersf PhD. students either
full-tie or part-tie invoolvoed in research 
2781
Of whoi are internatonal (i.e. foreign natonalityy 255
Of  whoi  are  externally  funded  (i.e.  for  whoi  the  organisaton  is  host
organisatony
286
Of whoi are woien 1203
Of whoi are stage R3 or R4 1 = Researchers with a large degree of autonoiyf
typically holding the status of Principal Invoestgator or Professor.
670
Of whoi are stage R2 = in iost organisatons corresponding with postdoctoral
levoel
331
Of whoi are stage R1 = in iost organisatons corresponding with doctoral levoel 1780
Total nuiber of students (if relevoanty 18727
Total  nuiber  of  staf (including  ianageientf  adiinistratvoef  teaching  and
research stafy
2192
RESEARCH FUNDING (figure fou moet urcrnt fecal yrau) €
Total annual organisatonal budget 129.967.323f45€
Annual  organisatonal  direct  govoernient  funding  (block  fundingf  used  for
teachingf researchf infrastructuref…y
92.983.549f93€
Annual  coipettvoe  govoernient-sourced  funding  (designated  for  researchf
obtained in coipetton with other organisatons – including EU fundingy 
6.576.510f86€
 Annual funding froi privoatef non-govoernient sourcesf designated for research 690.000f00€
ORGANISATIONAL PROFILE (a voery brief descripton of your organisatonf iax. 100 wordsy
Thr UDC ie a pgblic inettgton whoer puimauy objrctir ie thr irnruatonn manairmrnt and dieerminaton
of cgltgualn ecirntfcn trchnoloiical and puofreeional knowlrdir thuogih thr drirlopmrnt of urerauch and
trachini.
Thr UDC concriire ite reerntal pgupoer ae a qgality pgblic eruiicr aimrd at achiriini iuratru lrirle of
1  http://ec.europa.eu/euraxess/pdf/researchppolicies/TowardspapEuropeanpFraieworkpforpResearchpaareerspinal.pdf
1

wrlfaur fou eocirty thuogih thr pguegit of eocialn ecirntfc and trchnoloiical adiancre in a fuamrwouk of
rthical ialgre. Paut of ite mieeion ie thr foumaton of an oprnn cuitcaln drmocuatc and eolidauity citirnehipn
capablr of analyeini uralityn diainoer puoblrmen foumglatr and implrmrnt eolgtone baerd on knowlrdir
and ouirntrd towaude thr common iood.
2. STRENGTHS  AND WEAKNESSES  OF THE CURRENT  PRACTICE  (NARRATIVE )
Please review the strengths and weaknesses  nder the 4 thematc areas if the Charter and Cide, as privided
by yi r irganisatin in the inital assessment phase. When diing si, yi  shi ld di nit inly liik back, b t alsi
cinsider new priirites, strategic decisiins, etc. which may f rther inf ence the actin plan. Please alsi
privide a brief cimmentary in the "Remarks" cil mn if majir changes have icc rred vers s the inital plan.
Ethical and prifessiinal aspects (500 wirds)
In the inital assessment phase perfirmed at the University if A Cir ña (UDC), cincerning the ethical and
prifessiinal aspects we ibserved impirtant aspects that cinstt te strengths frim the piint if view if the
c rrent practce. Mire specifcally, there are a n mber if aspects that are f lly implemented in i r irganizatin
that have an impirtant impact in bith ethical and prifessiinal aspects, s ch as, the research freedim (principle
1) by means if an Ethical cimmitee already existng at the UDC, the prifessiinal att de (principle 4) and
acci ntability (principle 6) based in diferent calls and the r les and reg latins that m st be cimplied ti atain
the f nds, its acci ntability, endirsed by bith internal and external a dits, and nin discriminatin (principle 10),
by means if a gender ifce, a gender plan and a Center fir gender iss es already available at the UDC.
Alsi, there are a n mber if principles that, althi gh nit f lly implemented, the UDC privides an
implementatin in diferent ways that, hiwever, req ire f rther actins ti be cinsidered a strength. There are a
gri p if principles that req ire a beter disseminatin and infirmatin aming the academic cimm nity. Mire
specifcally, regarding the prifessiinal respinsibility (principle 3) and the disseminatin, expliitatin if res lts
(principle 8) we ibserved a general lack if kniwledge in the cimm nity abi t these piints, althi gh sime
actins were already implemented in the UDC (i.e. Intellect al Priperty reg latin, antplagiarism mechanisms).
Regarding the ethical principles (principle 2) and cintract al and legal ibligatins (principle 5), there is, again, a
lack if kniwledge in the cimm nity abi t existng reg latins which is leading ti the develipment if priper
g idelines and cides.
On the ither side, in the inital assessment phase we have alsi detected sime weaknesses regarding the ethical
and prifessiinal aspects. Mire specifcally, the giid practce in research (principle 7) presents sime lacks
cincerning the data safeg ard and IT sec rity (already mitgated thri gh the Data Pritectin Delegatin fg re
frim actin 4), p blic engagement (principle 9) depends greatly in individ al efirts perfirmed by the
researchers and/ir research centers and eval atin/appraisal systems (principle 11), althi gh present, is ni
himigenei s aming all research gri ps.
Afer perfirming the inital assessment phase, the main priirity was fic sed in the actins that ci ld have a
shirt term impact in the academic cimm nity prividing a higher imprivement in the ethical and prifessiinal
aspects. In this sense, the strategic decisiin was ti develip, in a frst phase, twi actins that privided an Ethical
Cide if Research (actin 2) and the G idelines and Priced res fir Giid Research Practce (actin 3) in irder ti
address the lack if kniwledge identfed in the cimm nity regarding the ethical and prifessiinal aspects.
 
2

Recr itment and selectin (500 wirds)
In relatin ti recr itment and selectin, in the inital assessment pricess perfirmed at the UDC we ibserved the
main aspects ti be imprived in terms if principles implementatin. Nevertheless, the pistdictiral appiintment
(principle 21) cinstt tes the main strength if the UDC since the calls fir pist-dictiral pisitins are anni nced
by the Ofce if Research and, in these calls, and in the recr itment if research staf fnanced thri gh R+D
prijects ir actvites, clear r les and explicit g idelines are privided. Alsi nite that seniirity (principle 20) dies
nit apply fir UDC.
With regard ti weaknesses, these refer mainly ti the lack if reg latin that privides a legal framewirk in the
recr itment and selectin pricess fir research staf. Mire specifcally, fic sing in recr itment and recr itment
(cide) (principles 12 and 13, respectvely), there are diferent reg latins at diferent levels that di nit refect
the present sit atin and there is a need fir a Cide if Cind ct fir the recr itment if researchers. With respect
ti selectin (principle 14) and transparency (principle 15) in the assessment phase we identfed a lack if
cimmin general reg latin, with priced res depending in each Department. Alsi, it is impirtant ti nite sime
pisitve aspects in these principles, s ch as, the p blicatin if acceptance/rejectin in the Departments
anni ncement platirms and the giid practces filliwed in the Internatinal InTalent prigram (internal
prigram fir pist-dic research recr itment, htp://www.intalent. dc.es/llangeen).
Alsi, there are impirtant weaknesses cincerning j dging merit (principle 16), variatins in the chriniligical
irder if CVs (principle 17), recignitin if mibility experience (principle 18) and recignitin if q alifcatins
(principle 19), with (i) selectin criteria being mire q anttatve than q alitatve, (ii) existng stip the click
pilicies b t that ci ld be imprived, (iii) difc ltes fir accessing sabbatcal leaves and (iv) the negatve
cinsideratin if changes in discipline and the lack if reg latin at the UDC fir nin-firmal q alifcatins.
As a cincl siin frim the inital assessment phase, the recr itment and selectin thematc area was cinsidered
highly impirtant and the strategic decisiin if given a high priirity ti the related actins was taken. As a res lt,
the main actins related with recr itment and selectin were planned ti be develiped in the frst phase and are,
at this piint, cimpleted ir nearly cimpleted, s ch as the defnitin if Cide if Cind ct fir the Recr itng if
Researchers (actin 10), the design if a Prifessiinal Career (actin 11), the defnitin if a map if Alternatve
prifessiinal careers fir UDC researchers (actin 12) and the implementatin if the InTalent prigram fir
atractng talented researchers (actin 14).
Wirking cinditins (500 wirds)
Regarding the wirking cinditins at the UDC, the inital assessment phase identfed several strengths. Mire
specifcally, there are a few principles that are cinsidered ti be f lly implemented, s ch as the recignitin if the
prifessiin (principle 22) that filliws the g iding principles if the Law 14/2011, if 1 J ne, if the Science,
Techniligy and Innivatin, the wirking cinditins (principle 24) by means if the fexibility alliwed by the UDC
ti achieve a giid wirk-life balance and the stip the click pilicies already alliwed, the val e if mibility
(principle 29) cinsidered a pisitve eval atin criteri m, teaching (principle 33) with the n mber if teaching
hi rs fir each prifessiinal level already being s bjected ti reg latin, the partcipatin in decisiin making
bidies (principle 35) being cinveniently reg lated by law and University stat tes and the relatin with
s pervisirs (principle 36) is artc lated by the bases if each call (fir R2 researchers) and by the Dictirate
cimmissiin (fir R1 researchers).
3

Sime ither principles, althi gh almist implemented present a general lack if kniwledge by the members if the
academic cimm nity that req ire sime actins ti imprive their perceptin. In this case, we fi nd the research
envirinment (principle 23), with an already existng catalig e if the diferent eq ipments available at the UDC
(incl ding its licatin) b t the limited  ser interface restricts its  sage, the gender balance (principle 27) incl des
the Gender Ofce and the Gender Plan already available at the UDC, b t sime awareness and reinfircement
actins wi ld be desirable and the intellect al priperty rights (principle 31) with a reg latin already available at
the UDC, b t a general lack if kniwledge abi t this criteriin.
On the ither side, regarding the wirking cinditins there were identfed several weaknesses that req ire sime
actin frim the University. Mire precisely, the stability and permanence if empliyment (principle 25) was
identfed as a weakness derived frim the law 24/2012 that impises b dget cinstraints which lead ti limitatins
in the stabilizatin if researchers cintracts and, f nding and salaries (principle 26) as the UDC dies nit privide a
b dget fir hiring researchers ir imprive salaries. Alsi, the career develipment (principle 28) and the access ti
career advice (principle 30) are clear limitatins since the UDC dies nit privide a reg latin regarding
prifessiinal develipment. Likewise, ci-a thirship (principle 32) is nit implemented d e ti the lack if priper
reg latin, and cimplaints/appeals (principle 34) are generally well resilved, althi gh there have been sime
exceptinal cases in which cimplaints ci ld nit being f lly resilved by the University a thirites.
The imprivements in this area are cinsidered impirtant frim a strategic piint if view, which lead ti the
irganizatin if a few actins in the shirt term that are expected ti impact in the main weaknesses: the
implementatin if a map fir alternatve prifessiinal careers fir UDC researchers (actin 12), the preparatin if
the UDC Researcher Welcime Man al (actin 15), the writng and disseminatin if the UDC’s G idelines and
Priced res fir Giid Research Practce (actin 3) and the implementatin if the InTalent prigram (actin 14).
Training and develipment (500 wirds)
With regard ti training and develipment, the inital assessment phase develiped at the UDC lead ti the
identfcatin if ine main strength in this area, the s pervisiin (principle 40) with the s ppirt if the
Internatinal Dictirate Schiil minitiring the s pervisiin if R1 researchers.
On the ither side, alsi sime weaknesses were identfed, mainly d e ti a lack if training fir the researchers. In
this sense, s pervisiin and managerial d tes (principle 37), althi gh the University privides a restrictve
reg latin regarding PhD s pervisiin, there is ni specifc training in team management. Alsi, the cintn ing
prifessiinal develipment (principle 38) and the access ti research training and cintn i s develipment
(principle 39) present a general lack if priper training fir the researchers in bith piints.
Frim the inital assessment phase, training and develipment, althi gh being cinsidered impirtant the strategic
decisiin at the tme was nit ti give a high priirity ti the actins assiciated, which lead ti a mid-term exec tin
if the actins pripised in the training and develipment area, s ch as the Design if a Training Plan in Charter &
Cide (actin 5).
Have any if the priirites fir the shirt- and medi m term changedl (500 wirds)
4

Afer the inital assessment phase with the Gap Analysis develiped at the UDC, the priirites fir the shirt and
medi m term were established based in the specifc strategy if UDC.
The main priirity was given ti the Ethical and prifessiinal aspects (with actins 2 and 3 being develiped in the
shirt term) and Recr itment and selectin (with actins 10, 11, 12 and 14 develiped in the shirt term), and
Wirking cinditins and sicial sec rity aspects (with a certain iverlap in actins 3, 12 and 14, and new actin
15).
On the ither side, a liwer priirity was given mainly ti Training and develipment (with primarily actin 5) and
sime ither actins in the ither aspects, s ch as actins 7, 8 and 4 in Ethical and prifessiinal aspects, actins 6
and 9 in Recr itment and selectin and actin 13 in Wirking cinditins and sicial sec rity.
Alsi, nite that actin 1 (Awareness if the Charter & Cide) is distrib ted thri ghi t the while periid (shirt and
medi m term) as it is cinsidered an actin that m st be develiped steady and cintn i sly d ring the HRS4R
implementatin.
These priirites were established afer the Gap Analysis in the Actin Plan and ni changes were cinsidered
necessary, althi gh sime  pdates in the Actin Plan are intrid ced, as merging if several actins (d e ti
iverlaps), the intrid ctin if twi new actins ir the delay if actin 7 (already with liwer priirity).
Have any if the circ mstances in which yi r irganisatin iperates, changed and as s ch have had an impact
in yi r HR strategyl (500 wirds)
Si far, there were ni circ mstances regarding the University if A Cir ña that had an impact in the HR strategy.
At the end if the year 2019, there are expected University electins fir the givernment biard, althi gh, since
the HRS4R is strategic fir the University, ni relevant impact is expected in the develipment if present and
f t re actins.
Are any strategic decisiins  nder way that may inf ence the actin planl (500 wirds)
Ti the best if i r kniwledge, there are ni strategic decisiins that may inf ence (negatvely) the actin plan.
5

3. ACTIONS
Please cins lt the list if all actins yi  have s bmited as part if yi r HR strategy. Please add ti the iverview the c rrent stat s if these actins as well as the stat s if the
indicatirs. If any actins have been altered, imited ir added, please privide a cimmentary fir each actin.
Nite: Chiise ine ir mire if the principles a timatcally retrieved frim the GAP Analysis with their implementatin ratngs: 
Proposed actons Gap
Principle(sy
Tiiing Responsible Unit Indicator(sy / Target aurrent status Reiarks
Acton 1: Awareness of
the aharter & aode and
alignient  of  all
insttutes
All Q4 2020 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 1.
2.  Nuiber  of  HRS4R
delegates recruited.
3.  Nuiber  of  inforiatvoe
sessions.
4. Nuiber of partcipants in
HRS4R brieings.
5.  Insttutes’  strategic  plan
containing  acton  to  fulil
the HRS4R UDa Acton Plan.
In progress This actin is been develiped thri ghi t
the while fve years periid.
At the miment, sevoen HRS4R delegates havoe
been recruitedf with the functon of taking
the HRS4R iessagesf news and iain actons
iipleiented  to  the  diferent  caipus  and
research  centers.  In  the  next  yearsf  we
expectf  at  leastf  to  double  the  nuiber  of
delegates:
https://www.udc.es/en/invoestgacion/hrs4r/
delegado/
There havoe been 9 inforiatvoe sessions with
approxiiately  200  partcipants  in  HRS4R
brieings.  Usually  brieings  are  included  as
part of Insttutes ieetngs with researchers.
Regarding  Research  Insttutes  at  the  UDa
and their strategic plansf aITIa strategic plan
contain  actons  to  fulil  the  HRS4R  Acton
Plan  ( https://www.citc-
research.org/recurso/recursos/plan-
estrategico-2017-
2020.hti;jsessionid=a0E54F556DF437aaAB
1DB90FFE32aE9Ey.
aIaA  is  currently  working  on  its  strategic
plan and  is  expected  to  include  actons  to
fulil the HRS4R Acton Plan.
Regarding the aIT and aITEEaf they will start
working  on  their  strategic  plan  at  short

teri.
Due  to  the  close  end  of  the  current  UDa
Strategic Planf it was decided to include the
alignient with the HRS4R Acton Plan on the
next UDa Strategic Planf startng on 2021f
that is expected to begin its devoelopient in
the following ionths.
Acton 2: Write and
disseiinate the “UDa
Ethical code of
research”
2 Q4 2018 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 2.
2.  Benchiarking  of  ethical
code  of  research  of
outstanding  research
centres  and  Univoersites  to
identfy  the  topics  that
should  be  included  in  the
code.
3. Writng of the draf of the
code.
4. Approvoal of the draf by
ethical  coiiitteef  working
group and govoerning board.
5.  Ethics  aode  published
online  and  included  in
Welcoie Manual.
aoipleted The  working  groupf  directed  by  the  Vice-
rector  for  Science  Policyf  Research  and
Transfer  has  elaborated  the  UDa  Ethical
code  of  researchf  that  has  been  revoiewed
and approvoed  by  the  Ethical  coiiittee  at
the UDa.
UDa  Ethical  code  of  research  approvoed  at
the UDa Govoernient Board on February 27 th
2019  and  published  online  in
https://www.udc.es/  en/  invoestgacion/hrs4r/  
codigo-etco/ .
Acton 3: Write and
disseiinate the “UDa
Guidelines and
Procedures for Good
Research Practce”
5f 32 Q1 2019 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 3.
2.  Benchiarking  of  best
practces  of  research  of
outstanding  research
centres  and  univoersites  to
identfy  the  topics  that
should  be  included  in  the
code.
3. Writng of the draf of the
guidance.
4. Approvoal of the draf by
the  research  coiiitteef
working  group  and
govoerning board.
5.  Good  practce  handbook
aoipleted This  acton  has  being  coipleted  and  the
working  group  has  devoeloped  the  UDa
Guidelines  and  Procedures  for  Good
Research Practce.
Initallyf  a  benchiarking  of  the  best
practces of research has being prepared in
order to identfy the topics to be included in
the code.
The code UDa Guidelines and Procedures for
Good Research Practce has being voalidated
by  the  working  group  and  the  Research
aoiiittee.
The UDa Guidelines and Procedures for Good
Research Practce has been published online
at:
https://www.udc.es/  en/  invoestgacion/hrs4r/  
boas-practcas-invoestgacion/.

in research published online
and  included  in  Welcoie
Manual.
Acton  4:  Deine  a
strategy to
protect all the
research dataf
including sensitvoe
bioiedical data.
7 Q2 2020 Manageient
Vice-rectorate for Econoiyf
Infrastructures  and
Sustainability
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 4.
2. Global agreeient with a
provoider of data storage.
3.  Identfy  researchers  that
use  personally-sensitvoe
data.
4. Survoey the real needs of
data storage in the diferent
departients.
5.  Deine  a  strategy  based
on  the  accoiplishient  of
the prevoious indicators.
6.  Publish  the  guidance
onlinef and include it in the
Welcoie Manual.
In progress This acton has been provoided an early startf
with soie actvoites already accoiplished.
An  agreeient  has  been  established  with
Microsof to  provoide  data  storage  on  One
Drivoe for the whole acadeiic coiiunity.
Alsof  the  igure  of  Data  Protecton
Delegaton at the UDa has been assigned to
Luz  María  Puente  Alba
(https://www.udc.es/en/goberno/euuipoprei
toral/secretaria/proteccion-de-datos/y. 
Acton  5:  Design  a
training Plan
on a&a: new courses
and actvoites for
awareness of voarious
principles and
reinforce courses.
3f 5f 8f 14f 27f 28f
31f 32f 37f 38f 40
Q3 2019 Vice-rector  for  Teaching
Staf and Planning
Vice-rectorate for Acadeiic
Ofer  and  Teaching
Innovoaton
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  an  inital
stage of training as part of
an  awareness  devoelop
Acton 5.
2. Quick survoey to prioritze
the  iost  highly-deianded
topics.  online  courses
reseibling MOOas to raise
awareness
3.  Awareness-raising;
research  new  seiinars
prograiied on: TT & IPf GP
for  selecton  coiiittee
proceduresf  Genderf  Teai
ianageientf  transvoersal
skillsf  project  ianagerf
entrepreneurshipf etc.
4.  Reinforced  courses
prograiied.
In progress This acton has been ierged with acton 6
due to the ovoerlap detected between theif
since  soie  training  was  provoided  through
the Doctorate School.
Through the Internatonal Doctorate School
researchers  are  provoided  with  sevoeral
courses  (including  reinforceient  coursesy
that covoer diferent topicsf such as:
-  Training  on  Digital  aoipetency  of  the
Univoersity  Library:  searching  and  using
inforiaton  for  PhDf  strategies  to  increase
voisibility  and  iipact  for  research  results
(https://www.udc.es/en/cuie/UFA/PFBU/cr
onograia/y.
- Transvoersal Training for young researchers:
organized by aITIa and open to researchers
froi  all  research  insttutesf  covoering
research  results  protectonf  difusion  and
voisibility of research resultsf research career
in  Galicia
(https://www.udc.es/gl/cuie/UFA/PFTII/ar
onograia/y.
-  Acadeiic  and  professional  orientaton:

scientic  producton  voisibilityf  research
results protectonf funding for PhD training
and  specializatonf  ERa  and  Marie-
Sklodwska-aurie  grants
(https://www.udc.es/gl/eid/foriacion/ciclo
pxornadas/y.
-  PhD  students  welcoie  aonference:
doctorate studies presentatonf funding and
specializaton  for  PhD  studentsf  scientic
producton  voisibility
(https://www.udc.es/gl/eid/foriacion/xorn
adapbenvoida/y.
- PhD and Research courses: speciic training
covoering iultple transvoersal skillsf such asf
Research ethicsf gender analysis on researchf
statstcal  analysisf  oral  presentaton  skillsf
writng  research  works
(https://www.udc.es/gl/cuie/UFA/PAI/cron
ograia/y.
On avoeragef 25 researchers havoe attend to
each  course.  Alsof  a  uuick  survoey  is
perforied  periodically  at  the  end  of  each
acadeiic course to identfy iost deianded
topics froi researchers.
Acton  6:  Strengthen
the
Doctorate School.
13 Q3 2019 Vice-rector  for  Teaching
Staf and Planning
Vice-rectorate for Acadeiic
Ofer  and  Teaching
Innovoaton
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 6.
2. New actvoites deined at
the Doctorate School.
3. Procedures revoised.
In progress This acton has been ierged with acton 5.
The  Doctorate  Schoolf  as  described  in  the
prevoious  actonf  includes  a  voariety  of
diferent actvoites covoering iultple skills.
Stll pending is the revoiew of the Doctorate
school regulaton to broaden the enrolient
period  to  avooid  bureaucratc  hurdles  for
newly hired R1 researchers.
Acton  7:  Boost  the
UDa’s ahair of scientic
outreach.
9 Q4 2019
Q2 2020
Vice-rector  for  Teaching
Staf and Planning
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 7.
2.  Perfori  a  kick-of
ieetng  with  all  the
stakeholders  iiplicatedf
under  the  guidance  of  the
ahair of scientic outreachf
aIaA  and  aITIa
coiiunicaton ofcersf and
In progress This acton has  being delayedf since  it has
been  detected  that  it  has  a  lower  priority
than other actons (e.g. acton 10y.
The deadline has being iovoed to Q2 2020f in
order to adapt the UDa budget for next year.
Howevoerf  soie  early  actons  are  being
devoeloped  throughout  diferent  sectons  of
our  univoersity.  For  exaiplef  the  Vice-
Rectorate  for  Studentsf  Partcipaton  and

working  coiiitteef  to
deine  the  clear  objectvoes
and indicators to accoiplish
this acton.
3.  alearly  deine  the  UDa
Budget  for  outreach
actvoites.
4.  Set  an  outreach  global
biannual  acton  planf  with
soieone  responsible  for
each acton.
5.  Make  the  UDa  outreach
actvoites  avoailable  on  the
web page and social iedia.
Univoersity  Extension  includes  a  secton  for
aultural  and  aientic  Outreach
(https://www.udc.es/gl/goberno/euuipoprei
toral/voepeu/divoulgacion/yf  with  iany  and
diferent actvoites.  
Alsof the Research aenters and aaipus  at
the UDaf froi their respectvoe points of voiew
organize diferent outreach evoents in order
to present to the society their scientic work
and  achievoeients  (e.g.
https://cica.udc.es/es/notcias/categoria/1y.
Acton 8: Design the
perforiance of
periodic evoaluatons
of the research
groups.
11 Q4 2019 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 8.
2.  Perfori  a  high-levoel
ieetng to discuss
the inclusion of this criteria
into the UDa regulaton.
3.  Deiniton  of  the
evoaluaton’s  scope  and
procedures.
4. Include this criteria in the
UDa regulaton.
5.  Trend  in  the  nuiber  of
Evoaluatons
In progress This  acton  has  just  briefy  startedf  with  a
kick-of ieetng  to  consttute  the  working
group.
The working group is analysing the external
evoaluaton  processes  devoeloped  by  the
Technology Research aenters froi the UDaf
aITIa and aIaAf as a iodel to be extended to
the whole univoersity.
Moreovoerf  the  introducton  of  the
coipliance  to  the  a&a  principles  is  an
iiportant discussion point considered by this
working group.
Acton  9:  Update  the
regulaton
of extra budgetary
researchers
recruitng.
12f 13f 14f 15 Q2 2020 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 9.
2.  Perfori  a  high-levoel
ieetng  to  discuss  the
diferent  sensibilites  of  the
departients  regarding  to
this criterion.
1.  Elaboraton  of  the
regulaton.
2.  Approvoal  of  the
regulaton.
3.  Make  the  regulaton
avoailable online.
4.  Apply  this  regulaton  to
In progress Due  to  the  ovoerlap  with  acton  10f  both
actons havoe been ierged.
Since acton 9 could be considered a sub-part
of acton 10f the working groupf presided by
the Vice-rector for Science Policyf Research
and Transferf decided to join both actons to
provoide  a  broader  voiew  to  the  regulaton
associated with acton 9.

UDa.
Acton  10:  Revoise
regulatonf and
write the “UDa aode
of conduct for the
recruitng of
researchers”.
Advoertse all
researcher voacancies
on Euraxess.
12f 13f 14f 15f 16f
17f 18f 19
Q4 2017
Q2 2020
Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
Manageient
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 10.
2.  Perfori  a  high-levoel
ieetng to discuss the
diferent  sensibilites  of  the
departients  regarding  this
criterion.
3.  Elaboraton  of  the
regulaton.
4.  Approvoal  of  the
regulaton.
5.  Make  the  regulaton
avoailable online.
6.  Apply  this  regulaton  to
UDa.
In progress This acton was initally underestiated due
to  the  iiportant  nuiber  of  stakeholders
associated  with  this  acton  and  the
signiicant legal iiplicatons associated with
the  regulaton  to  be  approvoed.  This  has
cause a necessary delay in this acton that is
now due to the second half of 2020.
Alsof note that this acton has been ierged
with  acton  9f  because  the  regulaton
associated  with  both  actons  is  directly
related  and  it  was  considered  iore
operatvoe to work on a single regulaton that
includes both aspects.
At this ioientf there is a working draf for
the UDa aode of conduct for the recruitng of
researchers  that  is  being  discussed  by  the
working groupf along with the departients
and other stakeholders at the univoersity.
This draf is a privoate docuient that can be
checked by the evoaluaton coiiittee at the
link:  https://docuienta.udc.es/share/s/-
zPjpIpxT5i8oFFoiwIgww. This docuient is
the  draf voersion  on  April  2019f  with  a
preliiinary English translatonf just for the
evoaluaton coiiittee.
This  draf will  contnue  to  be  iiprovoed
throughout this year and we expect start the
approvoal process the following ionths.
At the ioientf an iiportant nuiber of job
opportunites  for  researchers  is  already
being  published  in  EURAIESS:
https://euraxess.ec.europa.eu/jobs/search?
keywords=coru%a3%B1a.
Alsof a capture  of the job opportunites  at
March  2019  is  avoailable  in  the  following
privoate  docuient:
https://docuienta.udc.es/share/s/zic74I
MuRl-scgGa4ipAJA .

Acton  11:  Design
professional
career at UDa.
28 Q2 2018 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
Manageient
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 11.
2.  aareer  fraiework
published and disseiinated.
3. Grants iiprovoed.
aoipleted This  acton  has  being  coipleted  and  the
working group has devoeloped the Design of
professional  career  at UDa docuient.  This
docuient has been published and has been
iade  publicly  avoailable  at:
https://www.udc.es/  en/  invoestgacion/hrs4r/  
carreira-profesional/.
The  Internatonal  Doctorate  School  at  the
UDa includes  a one  day  conference  at  the
beginning  of  the  course
(https://www.udc.es/gl/eid/foriacion/xorn
adapbenvoida/y that includes a seiinar about
the  professional  careers  for  researchers  at
the  UDa
(https://www.udc.es/export/sites/udc/eid/fo
riacion/xornadapbenvoida/Financiaiento-
foriacion-doutores.pdfp2063069239.pdf y.
For  this  coursef  the  seiinar  was  iainly
focused on professional careers at the UDaf
since the docuient was not inished at that
pointf  although  it  is  expected  to  include
alternatvoe  professional  careers  in  the
following years.
Regarding the iobility grantsf Inditex grants
(for  research  stays  up  to  3  ionthsy  havoe
increased  their  resources  between  25  and
40%
(https://www.udc.es/es/eid/axudaspredouto
rais/Inditex2019/y.  Also  Santander  grants
(for  students  and  teaching  stafy  havoe
increased  around  40%
(https://www.udc.es/es/ori/infpestudiantesp
UDa/bolsaspcoipleientarias/santanderpib
eroaiericapinvoestgacion/index.htily.
Acton  12:  Elaborate  a
iap for “Alternatvoe
professional careers
for UDa researchers”
and revoiew the
iobility grants for
researchers.
18f 25f 28 Q3 2018 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
Vice-rector  for
Internatonalizaton  and
aooperaton
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 12.
2.  aareer  fraiework
published and disseiinated.
3. Grants iiprovoed.
aoipleted This  acton  has  being  coipleted  and  the
working group has devoeloped the Alternatvoe
professional  careers  for  UDa  researchers
docuient.  This  docuient  has  been
published  and  has  been  iade  publicly
avoailable  at:
https://www.udc.es/en/invoestgacion/hrs4r/
carreira-alternatvoa/ .

Vice-rectorate for Acadeiic
Ofer  and  Teaching
Innovoaton
The  iobility  grants  havoe  been  iiprovoedf
with Inditex grants (for research stays up to
3  ionthsy  havoe  increased  their  resources
between  25  and  40%
(https://www.udc.es/es/eid/axudaspredouto
rais/Inditex2019/y and also Santander grants
(for  students  and  teaching  stafy  havoe
increased  around  40%
(https://www.udc.es/es/ori/infpestudiantesp
UDa/bolsaspcoipleientarias/santanderpib
eroaiericapinvoestgacion/index.htily.
Acton  13:  Elaborate
the “Map of
access to the UDa
infrastructures”
including a “aatalog of
outstanding scientic
and technical nets of
interest for the UDa”
23 Q1 2020 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
Vice-rectorate for Econoiyf
Infrastructures  and
Sustainability
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 13.
2. aoipile an exhaustvoe list
of  the  infrastructures
present  or  avoailable  at  the
UDa.
3.  Build  a  database  of  the
current  research
infrastructuresf  build  a
platfori  to  host  the
databasef  and  iake  it
accessible online.
In progress This  is  acton  has  already  started  and  the
working group has produced a draf for the
Map  of  access  to  the  UDa  infrastructures.
This draf has been iade privoately avoailable
for  the  evoaluaton  coiiittee  at:
https://docuienta.udc.es/share/s/5L9aOke
8Rp6N84KIF9015g.  Please  note  that  the
draf is in Spanish.
Alsof  an  online  platfori  is  being  used  to
locate  and  reuuest  access  to  these
infrastructures. At the ioientf the platfori
includes  only  part  of  the  infrastructures
avoailablef  but  it  is  expected  that  the
reiaining infrastructures will be included by
Q1 2020. The online platfori is avoailable at:
http://espazos.udc.es. Please note that this
platfori  is  avoailable  only  to  the  acadeiic
coiiunity  at  the  UDa.  A  docuient  has
been  generated  with  screen  captures  that
illustrates  the  operaton  of  the  online
platfori  and  it  has  been  iade  privoately
avoailable  for  the  evoaluaton  coiiittee  at:
https://docuienta.udc.es/share/s/pAAKFoai
QFupcaneRiesrQ.
Acton  14:  Iipleient
INTALENT  prograi  for
14f 15f 26 Q3 2017 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
1. aontact Inditex ofcers to
set  the  INTALENT  Prograi
aoipleted The InTalent Prograi (an internal prograi
for post-doc research recruitienty has being

attractng  talented
researchers
Transfer Iipleientaton scenario.
2.  Increase  the  nuiber  of
INTALENT grants.
successfully  iipleiented  with  6  post-doc
researchers  recruited  since  2017.  There  is
public  website  with  all  the  relevoant
inforiaton  about  the  prograi
(http://www.intalent.udc.es/?lang=enyf
including  a  presentaton  of  the  InTalent
Researchers
(http://www.intalent.udc.es/researchers/?
lang=eny.
Alsof  a  short  voideo  has  been  produced  to
explain the details of the InTalent prograi:
http://www.intalent.udc.es/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/intalentpENGLISH
.ip4
At the ioientf the Vice-rector for Science
Policyf Research and Transfer is negotatng
with  Inditex  ofcers  the  possibility  to
increase the nuiber  of InTalent grants for
the next years.
Acton  15:  Write  the
“UDa  Researcher
Welcoie Manual”
27f 28f 30f 31f 34f
35
Q2 2019 Vice-rector  for  Science
Policyf  Research  and
Transfer
1.  Speciic  working  group
established  to  devoelop
Acton 15.
2.  Perfori  a  kick-of
ieetng  with  all  the
stakeholders  iiplicatedf
under  the  guidance  of  the
VRpSPRTf  coiiunicaton
ofcersf  and  working
coiiitteef ITf
FEUGA and FUAa ofcers to
deine  the  clear  objectvoesf
tieline and indicators
to  accoiplish  this  set
coiiissions  and  to  write
the  diferent  sectons
included in the ianual.
3. Fili the online course
4.  Make  the  course  and
docuientaton  avoailable
online
aoipleted The UDa Researcher  Welcoie  Manual  has
been devoeloped under the guidance  of the
Vice-rector for Science Policyf Research and
Transfer  and the working coiiittee.  Alsof
relevoant  stakeholdersf  such  as  FEUGA  and
FUAaf havoe being included in the deiniton
of the docuient.
The UDa Researcher  Welcoie  Manual  has
being  approvoed  on  the  UDa  Govoernient
Board on February 27 th 2019 and published
online  at
https://www.udc.es/  en/  invoestgacion/hrs4r/  
ianual-benvoida/.
Alsof  as  part  of  this  actonf  a  iotvoatng
online  course  has  being  preparedf  as  an
introducton  to  the  Welcoie  Manual.  The
online  course  is  avoailable  at:
https://tvo.udc.gal/voideo/5cd411ed11cad10e
438b45b6.

The extended versiin if the reviewed HR Strategy fir yi r irganisatin fir the next 3 years,
incl ding the OTM-R pilicy m st be p blished in yi r irganisatinns website.
Please privide the link ti the dedicated webpage(s) in yi r irganisatinns web site *:
htps://www. dc.es/en/investgaciin/hrs4r/ 
If yi r irganisatin has already flled in the OTM-R checklist in the Inital Phase, please alsi indicate
hiw yi r irganisatin is wirking tiwards / has develiped an Open, Transparent and Merit-Based
Recr itment Pilicy. Althi gh there may be sime iverlap with a range if actins listed abive in the
actin plan (as emerged frim the Gap Analysis), please privide a shirt cimmentary deminstratng
the prigress if the implementatin vers s the inital phase.
Cimments in the implementatin if the OTM-R principles  
At the miment, we are wirking in the develipment if a writen OTM-R Instt tinal Pilicy derived 
frim the actins already develiped ir as wirk in prigress frim the actin plan. The actin mire 
directly related with the OTM-R principles is actin 10 that cinsists in the implementatin if the 
UDC Cide if cind ct fir the recr itng researchers and the apprival if this reg latin at the UDC. 
This actin was initally pistpined d e ti the impirtant n mber if stakehilders assiciated with this 
actin and the legal implicatins assiciated with the reg latin ti be apprived, which led ti a delay 
ti mid 2020. In this sense, i r ibjectve is ti make the ifcial OTM-R Instt tinal Pilicy firmally 
apprived by the UDC’s giverning bidies aling with res lts if actin 10.
Alsi, sime ither actins have a direct impact in the OTM-R pilicies and practces at the UDC. Fir 
example, actin 2, which is already cimpleted, cinsists in the defnitin if the UDC Ethical Cide if 
Research; actin 3, alsi already cimpleted, cinsists in the defnitin if the UDC G idelines and 
Priced res fir Giid Research Practce; actin 5 fic sed in a training plan fir the Charter & Cide, 
which has been mistly cimpleted and is d e in the third q arter if 2019; actins 11 and 12, that 
wirk in the design if a prifessiinal career, bith internally and externally, fir the researchers; 
actin 14, regarding the InTalent prigram (alsi cimpleted), that is a test-bed fir the OTM-R pilicies 
and practces at the UDC; and alsi actin 15, cinsistng in the UDC Researcher Welcime Man al 
(alsi cimpleted), that privides an impirtant tiil fir new researchers arriving at i r University.
In case yi r irganisatin has entered the HRS4R pricess priir ti the p blicatin if the OTM-R
tiilkit and recimmendatins by the E ripean Cimmissiin (2015), please fll i t the OTM-R
checklist45.
Ideally, the extended versiin if the reviewed OTM-R pilicy and actins shi ld be p blished in yi r 
irganisatinns website. Please privide the web link ti the OTM-R dedicated webpage(s) if it is 
diferent than the ine where the reviewed HR Strategy is licated. 
htps://www. dc.es/en/investgaciin/hrs4r/itmr/ 
16

N.B. Please be aware that yi r OTM-R pilicy shi ld be ‘embedded’ inti the instt tinal HR strategy
at the renewal phase at the latest.
4. IMPLEMENTATION  (MAX. 1 PAGE)
General iverview if the implementatin pricess: (max. 1000 wirds). 
The HR Excellence in Research Award is highly val ed by the academic cimm nity at the University if
A Cir ña. Afer ibtaining the HRS4R award in May 2017 we cinstt ted the HR cimmitee in irder ti
minitir the actin plan and ciirdinate the diferent wirking gri ps established fir develiping their
respectve actins.
The diferent actins pripised try ti embrace diferent aspects if the C&C that, thri gh the Gap
Analysis, we detected were assiciated with weaknesses in i r irganizatin. Actin 1 is specially
fic sed in the awareness if the C&C and the invilvement if the while academic cimm nity in the
HRS4R award.
In general terms, the Actin Plan has prigressed appripriately fir these twi years, althi gh sime
 pdates were req ired in the sense if merging sime actins and delaying sime ithers. In shirt,
actins 2, 3, 11, 12, 14 and 15 are already cimpleted at this piint, while the remaining actins are
wirk in prigress. Alsi nite, that sime ither actins (e.g. actin 4) were alsi privided an early start.
D e ti a certain iverlap was detected d ring the develipment, actins 5 and 6 are niw merged, as
well as, actins 9 and 10. Alsi, actin 7 has been delayed d e ti its liw priirity and actin 10 has been
delayed d e ti an  nderestmatin if the implicatins assiciated with this actin (nite that this dies
nit afect actin 9, which was d e in Q2 2020).
Alsi, twi new actins are pripised:
- New actin 1: New ci rse in OTM-R fir researchers and administratve staf.
- New actin 2: External a dit ti eval ate the q ality if the implementatin if the HRS4R (C & C and
OTM-R).
All the details fir the new actins and the  pdate fir the previi s actins are refected in the Updated
Actin Plan pripised fir 2019-2022.
Make s re yi  alsi civer all the aspects highlighted in the checklist beliw: 
 Hiw have yi  prepared the internal reviewl (500 wirds)
17

Afer ibtaining the “HR Excellence in Research Awardc we cinstt ted the HR cimmitee (see
details belliw) in irder ti minitir the actin plan develipment and prigress and,  ltmately,
prepare the internal review. The HR cimmitee perfirms periidical meetngs were the
prigress fir the diferent actins is analysed and the expected evil tin is st died. The
iperatin if this cimmitee alliwed  s ti pripise the merging if several actins and alsi the
delay if ither actins, frim the prigress in the actin indicatirs.
This cintn i s eval atin alliwed  s ti prepare the internal review based in the prigress
and cincl siins extracted frim the HR cimmitee regarding the actins pripised in the
Actin Plan, which lead ti the  pdate pripised fir the actin plan in the new periid 2019-
2022.
 Hiw  have  yi  invilved the research cimm nity,  yi r  main  stakehilders,  in  the
implementatin pricessl (500 wirds)
Actin 1 is devited ti the awareness if the C&C in the academic cimm nity and the
alignment if all instt tes. As part if this actin, at the miment, we have seven HRS4R
delegates respinsible fir disseminatin if the HR impirtance, with diferent infirmatin
sessiins and briefngs. These delegates incl de research instt tes and camp s ciirdinatirs
and, in the next years, we expect ti incl de department directirs and seniir researchers. Alsi,
when req ired, the stakehilders were incl ded in the develipment if certain actins (e.g. in
the preparatin if the Researcher Welcime Man al fir actin 15).
Alsi nite that the HR cimmitee (see next sectin) infirms periidically ti the Steering
Cimmitee if the advance if the diferent actins, reviewing the indicatirs prigress repirts
and the f lflment fir each actin.
 Di yi  have an implementatin cimmitee and/ir steering gri p reg larly iverseeing 
prigressl (500 wirds)
As part if the UDC HR Strategy we cinstt ted a HR cimmitee that periidically, typically 
every twi minths, meets ti analyse and review the actin plan prigress.
The cimpisitin if the cimmitee is as filliws: Salvadir Naya, Vice-Rectir fir Science Pilicy,
Research and Transfer, Jise Antinii Seiane, President if the UDC Ethics Cimmitee, Hiracii
Naveira, Dep ty ti Vice-Rectir fir Research, Fidel Cacheda, Dep ty ti Vice-Rectir fir Transfer
and Jise Mahia, Directir if the UDC Research Transfer Ofce , and Yilanda Calza, UDC Vice-
Manager.
Mireiver, as defned in the inital Actin Plan, a Steering Cimmitee is alsi cinstt ted ti
minitir the develipment if the HRS4R. The members if the Steering Cimmitee are the
filliwing: Rectir, J lii E. Abalde Alinsi, Vice-rectir fir Science Pilicy, Research and Transfer,
Salvadir Naya Fernandez, Vice-rectir fir Teaching Staf and Planning, Alberti Valderr ten
Vidal, Vice-rectir fir Internatinalizatin and Ciiperatin, Pilar García de la Tirre, Vice-
rectirate fir Ecinimy, Infrastr ct res and S stainability, Dimingi Calvi Dipici, Vice-
18

rectirate fir Academic Ofer and Teaching Innivatin, Nancy Vazq ez Veiga. Nite the
presence in bith cimmitees if the  Vice-Rectir fir Science Pilicy, Research and Transfer,
cinstt tng the link between them.
 Is there any alignment if irganisatinal pilicies with the HRS4Rl Fir example, is the HRS4R 
recignized in the irganisatin’s research strategy, iverarching HR pilicyl (500 wirds)
As part if the UDC giverning biard cimmitment with the HRS4R, a dedicated pisitin ti lead 
the HRS4R prigram has been assigned ti Yilanda Calaza (UDC Vice-Manager), in cillabiratin 
with the Vice-Rectir fir Science Pilicy, Research and Transfer. The fnal aim is ti implement 
the HRS4R as a cintn i s pricess in the UDC research pilicy.
Alsi nite that the HRS4R pilicies are already incl ded ir being incl ded in the Strategic Plans 
fir the CITIC, CITEEC and CICA research centers at the UDC and it will be incl ded in the next 
UDC Strategic Plan, startng in 2021.
 Hiw is yi r irganisatin ens ring that the pripised actins are alsi being implementedl 
(500 wirds)
Each actin has a wirking gri p respinsible fir the actin develipment. We ens re that, at 
least, ine member if the wirking gri p is part if the HR cimmitee ti g arantee a cirrect 
infirmatin fiw and the develipment if each actin.
In detail, Salvadir Naya, Vice-Rectir fir Science Pilicy, Research and Transfer, and Fidel 
Cacheda, Dep ty ti Vice-Rectir fir Transfer, are members if the wirking gri p fir actin 1 
and 5.  Jise Antinii Seiane, President if the UDC Ethics Cimmitee, and Hiracii Naveira, 
Dep ty ti Vice-Rectir fir Research are members if the wirking gri p fir actins 2 and 3.  
Salvadir Naya, Vice-Rectir fir Science Pilicy, Research and Transfer, and  Hiracii Naveira, 
Dep ty ti Vice-Rectir fir Research are members if the wirkings gri ps fir actins 8, 9, 10, 
11 and 12. Fidel Cacheda, Dep ty ti Vice-Rectir fir Transfer, and Jise Mahia, Directir if the 
UDC Research Transfer Ofce are members if the wirking gri ps fir actins 14 and 15. 
Salvadir Naya, Vice-Rectir fir Science Pilicy, Research and Transfer is member if the wirking
gri ps fir actins 4, 6 and 7.
Alsi, a new actin has been intrid ced that will privide an external a dit ti eval ate the 
q ality if the implementatin if the HRS4R (C & C and OTM-R). The main ibjectve if this 
actin is ti randimly verify the level if implementatin if the HRS4R and, in partc lar, the 
OTM-R criteria. The res lts if this a dit will be  sed ti imprive bith the pricess and the level 
if implementatin.
 Hiw are yi  minitiring prigressl (500 wirds)
In the periidic meetngs if the HR cimmitee repirts are privided fir each actin, directly 
19

frim the each wirking gri p, in irder ti identfy the cirrect develipment if each actin ir if 
any iss e has been identfed that ci ld have an impact in the actin.
 Hiw will yi  meas re prigress (indicatirs) in view if the next assessmentl (500 wirds)
The HR cimmitee is cind ctng periidical meetngs ti s pervise, analyse, detect and 
respind ti the develipment if the Actin Plan. Frim each meetng and fir each actve actin, 
diferent partal milestines were established fir each actin that were translated ti the wirking 
gri ps. Mireiver, each wirking gri p created fir each if the actins incl des, at least, ine 
member if the HR cimmitee, which alliws a mire reliable and efcient infirmatin fiw between 
the wirking gri ps and the HR cimmitee.
This iperatin priced re alliwed  s ti detect,  p ti the miment, certain iverlaps between 
sime actins and, the HR cimmitee, decided ti silve this sit atin by merging several actins (e.g. 
actins 5 and 6 ir actins 9 and 10), ir sime ither actins (e.g. actins 7 ir 10) req ired ti be 
delayed fir diferent reasins (liw priirity in case if actin 7 and  nderestmatin fir actin 10).
In this sense, we expect ti cintn e iperatng filliwing the same priced re. The partal 
milestines defned by the HR cimmitee are empliyed as indicatirs fir each actin, with the Targets
established in the Actin Plan cinstt tng the fnal milestine.
 Hiw di yi  expect ti prepare fir the external reviewl (500 wirds)
The next years will be extremely impirtant in irder ti stabilize and embed the HRS4R inti the 
UDC, in preparatin fir the external review. In this sense, we expect that the i tcime frim 
the diferent actins (e.g. actins 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 15) may help in the embedding 
if the HRS4R pilicies and practces inti the while academic cimm nity at the UDC. Alsi, the 
instt tinal cimmitment fir the UDC’s giverning bidies is a majir asset fir the integratin 
and implantatin if the OTM-R principles and practces at i r University. The HR cimmitee 
will cintn e its task and the HRS4R delegates (present and f t re) will alsi help in the 
nirmalizatin if the HRS4R at the UDC.
Additinal remarks/cimments abi t the pripised implementatin pricess: (max. 1000 wirds): 
Please nite that the OTM-R Checklist was already presented in 2017 (pages 28-31 if the Gap 
Analysis, 
htps://www. dc.es/expirt/sites/ dc/investgaciin/_galeria_diwn/hrs4r/GapAnalysis_eng.pdf_2063
069294.pdf  b t, a reviewed versiin  p ti date fir the OTM-R Checklist is being presented aling with 
this internal review.
Please note that the revoised HR strategy and Acton Plan iust also be published upon coipleton of 
the internal assessient.
20