                          Vicerreitoría de Titulacións e Internacionalización    
Anexo 2 – Modelo de acordo de formación STT      Mobility Agreement Staff Mobility For Trainingi Planned period of the physical mobility: from [day/month/year] to [day/month/year]  Duration (days) – excluding travel days: ………………….   If applicable, planned period of the virtual component: from [day/month/year] to [day/month/year]  The Staff Member Last name (s)  First name (s)  Seniorityii  Nationalityiii  Gender [Male/ Female/Undefined]  Academic year 2024/25 E-mail   The Sending Institution Name Universidade da  Coruña Faculty/Department International  Relations Office Erasmus codeiv  (if applicable)   E LA-CORU01 
Address O Lagar Campus Elviña 15071 A Coruña Country/ Country codev SPAIN -ES Contact person  name and position Bruno Casal Rodríguez Head IRO Contact person e-mail / phone Bruno Casal Rodríguez Email: erasmus@udc.gal Tel : +34981167000  The Receiving Institution / Enterprisevi Name   Erasmus code  (if applicable)   Faculty/Department  
Address  Country/ Country code  Contact person, name and position  Contact person e-mail / phone    Size of enterprise  (if applicable) ☐<250 employees ☐>250 employees  For guidelines, please look at the end notes on page 3.   
Higher Education  Mobility Agreement form Participant’s name   

                          Vicerreitoría de Titulacións e Internacionalización    
Section to be completed BEFORE THE MOBILITY I. PROPOSED MOBILITY PROGRAMME Language of training: ……………………………………… 
Overall objectives of the mobility:     Training activity to develop pedagogical and/or curriculum design skills: Yes ☐   No ☐       Added value of the mobility (in the context of the modernisation and internationalisation strategies of the institutions involved):     Training activities to be carried out (specify training days):     Expected outcomes and impact (e.g. on the professional development of the staff member and on both institutions):      II. COMMITMENT OF THE THREE PARTIES  By signingvii this document, the staff member, the sending institution and the receiving institution/enterprise confirm that they approve the proposed mobility agreement. The sending higher education institution supports the staff mobility as part of its modernisation and internationalisation strategy and will recognise it as a component in any evaluation or assessment of the staff member. 

                          Vicerreitoría de Titulacións e Internacionalización    
The staff member will share his/her experience, in particular its impact on his/her professional development and on the sending higher education institution, as a source of inspiration to others.  The staff member and the beneficiary institution commit to the requirements set out in the grant agreement signed between them. The staff member and the receiving institution/enterprise will communicate to the sending institution any problems or changes regarding the proposed mobility programme or mobility period. The staff member Name: Signature:  Date:   The sending institution  Name of the responsible person: Bruno Casal Rodríguez – Head IRO   Signature:   Date:    The receiving institution/enterprise Name of the responsible person:  Signature:   Date:    i  Adaptations of this template: • In the case of mobility between Programme and Partner Countries, this agreement must be always signed by the staff member, the Programme Country HEI as beneficiary and the Partner Country HEI as sending or receiving organisation. In case of mobility from Partner Country HEIs to Programme Country enterprises the last box should be duplicated to include the signature of the Programme Country HEI (the beneficiary) and the receiving organisation (four signatures in total). ii  Seniority: Junior (approx. < 10 years of experience), Intermediate (approx. > 10 and < 20 years of experience) or Senior (approx. > 20 years of experience). iii  Nationality: Country to which the person belongs administratively and that issues the ID card and/or passport. iv Erasmus Code: A unique identifier that every higher education institution that has been awarded with the Erasmus Charter for Higher Education receives. It is only applicable to higher education institutions located in Programme Countries. v Country code: ISO 3166-2 country codes available at: https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#search. vi Any Programme Country enterprise or, more generally, any public or private organisation active in the labour market or in the fields of education, training and youth (training of staff members from Programme Country HEIs in Partner Country non-academic partners is not eligible).  vii Circulating papers with original signatures is not compulsory. Scanned copies of signatures or electronic signatures may be accepted, depending on the national legislation of the country of the sending institution (in the case of mobility with Partner Countries: the national legislation of the Programme Country). Certificates of attendance can be provided electronically or through any other means accessible to the staff member and the sending institution.   