Description
Advantage
Profile
Enrolment
News
Syllabus
Contact
GL
ES
EN
Master’s Degree in Business Management and Administration (MUDAE-MBA)
Get closer to business reality
The aim of this master's degree is to bring students closer to business reality by creating a teaching environment that allows the application of ``learning by doing`` in a multidisciplinary context, providing them with specialist knowledge in the field of business management and administration.
This master's degree will be held entirely in Spanish. All students must have sufficient linguistic ability to understand the lectures and work in a team with their Spanish-speaking peers. Foreign students from non-Spanish speaking countries who apply for the master's enrolment must have an interview in Spanish with the master's coordinator.
Master with mention of Excellence from the Xunta de Galicia
IN DETAIL
30
VACANCIES
60
ECTS CREDITS
RESULTING ACTIVITIES
Contact with external professionals.
Attendance at conferences given by managers and professionals.
PROFESSIONAL INTERNSHIPS
6 ECTS credits (100 hours)
30 vacancies
INTERNATIONALISATION PROGRAMME
RENNES (FRANCE)
Destination: Rennes Qualification acquired: Double degree: Master’s degree in Business Administration and Management (University of A Coruña) and selected master at the Rennes School of Business .
SANTIAGO DE CHILE
Destination: Santiago de Chile Qualification acquired: Double degree: Master’s degree in Business Administration and Management (University of A Coruña) and Master’s degree in Business Administration (MBA) (University of Santiago de Chile).
Possibility of internationalisation and double degrees
Innovative methodology based on the “Case Method”
Conferences of professionals and managers
Internships in companies worth 6 credits
Advantages of studying the Master's degree at the School of Economics and Business of the UDC
Application of an innovative methodology , oriented to the development of real projects, based on the analysis and resolution of problems that the managers of the different departments of companies have to face in their daily practice.
Application of an innovative methodology , oriented to the development of real projects, based on the analysis and resolution of problems that the managers of the different departments of companies have to face in their daily practice.
Participation in Management Workshops , to meet first-hand external professionals who work in companies of recognised prestige.
Participation in Management Workshops , to meet first-hand external professionals who work in companies of recognised prestige.
Internships in companies in different sectors.
Internships in companies in different sectors.
Possibility of carrying out a double de gree abroad , thanks to the existing internationalisation program with Rennes School of Business in Rennes.
Possibility of carrying out a double de gree abroad , thanks to the existing internationalisation program with Rennes School of Business in Rennes.
Access to the doctoral programme taught at the School of Economics and Business of the University of A Coruña.
Access to the doctoral programme taught at the School of Economics and Business of the University of A Coruña.
ACCESS PROFILE
The programme is preferably aimed at recent graduates in Business Administration and Management, Business Studies, Economics and other related fields. Although this is the preferred academic profile for access, the programme is also open to any other qualifications that aim to carry out their professional activity in the world of business management.
COURSE OBJECTIVE
The skills and abilities acquired by the students enable them to occupy management positions in companies and organisations oriented at the management of the different functional areas, as well as to carry out initiatives in the creation of companies.
Impact data of the last edition (2019/2020)
97.4 %
of credits passed regarding credits presented to exams
90.9 %
labor insertion rate
20
conferences of professionals and managers
MUDAE-MBA (UE)
Consult the approximate cost per academic year in the following link
MUDAE-MBA (Not UE)
Consult the approximate cost per academic year in the following link
With the sponsorship and collaboration of the Family Business Chair of the Universidade da Coruña
SYLLABUS
FIRST TERM
Human Resources Management: 3 ECTS
Corporate Law: 3 ECTS
Marketing Management: 6 ECTS
Financial Management: 6 ECTS
General Management: 6 ECTS
Strategic management through business simulation : 6 ECTS (3 ECTS correspond to the first term and 3 to the second)
Management workshops: 6 ECTS (3 ECTS correspond to the first term and 3 to the second)
SECOND TERM
Analysis of the Environment: 3 ECTS
Family Business Management: 3 ECTS
Strategic management through business simulation : 6 ECTS (3 ECTS correspond to the first term and 3 to the second)
Information Systems ICT Management 6 ECTS
Management workshops: 6 ECTS (3 ECTS correspond to the first term and 3 to the second)
Internships in companies: 6 ECTS
Master’s thesis: 6 ECTS
Venue of the course
Timetable
Modality
TIMETABLE
Consult the timetable in the following link
TEST SCHEDULE
Consult the test schedule in the following link
Master enrolment
MUDAE’s academic teaching activities begin on the first school day in October. A Welcome Day is held for students the week before the start (late September), although attendance is not mandatory. The rest of the teaching activities follow the guidelines established in the UDC Academic Calendar, which can be consulted below.
Academic calendar
María Carmen Gago Cortés
+34 881 012 460
m.gago@udc.es
Facebook
Linkedin
administracion.economia@udc.es
School of Economics and Business - Elviña Campus - 15071 - A Coruña
2018 School of Economics and Business of the University of A Coruña. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy .