Search form
Home
Faculty Government Quality Assurance Intership system Tutorial Action Plan Mobility programmes Regulations
Government
Quality Assurance
Intership system
Tutorial Action Plan
Mobility programmes
Regulations
Teaching Graduate studies Posgraduate studies
Graduate studies
Posgraduate studies
Research
Activities
Services
Regulations
SUG-UDC guidelines
Faculty regulation
DFP regulation
MFP regulation
Mobility regulation
Internship regulation
Home
Faculty
Regulations
SUG-UDC guidelines
SUG-UDC guidelines
Es
Gal
Objectives and Goals of the Galician University System
1. The following objectives and goals of the Galician University System are hereby recognized:
a) The creation, the transmission, and the diffusion of culture and knowledge, and scientific, technical, humanistic, and artistic methods, as well as the training and education essential to women and men for professional development in accordance with their training
b) The guarantee of autonomy for the university, founded on the principle of academic liberty, and made manifest in the liberty of professorship, investigation, and studies.
c) Coordination and cooperation as basic relational elements for the streamlining of the university map, and to strengthen Galician universities as a whole, while respecting the identity of each.
d) The promotion of critical thought and a culture of liberty, solidarity, equality, and pluralism, and the transmission of these civic and social values of a democratic society. Special attention will be paid to the promotion of equality of treatment and opportunities among women and men, as well as equality of opportunities for special-needs students.
e) The enrichment of the intellectual, cultural, scientific and technical heritage of Galicia, with the goal of general, social, and economic progress and sustainable development.
f) The promotion of Galician, the official and unique language of Galicia, and its coexistence with Castillian, also an official language, and, should it be the case, with other languages essential for teaching and investigation.
g) The tightening of collaborative and exchange programs with public and private higher educational centers and institutions both domestic and international, with special attention paid to Portugal and Latin-America.
2. The universities associated with the Galician University System will collaborate with public offices in the achievement of goals and objectives.
Universities associated with the Galician University System
UDC Regulations
General Regulations
Academic Regulations
Degree-Specific Regulations
Student Regulations
Faculty Regulations
Investigation and Transfer Regulations
CONTACT
SUGGESTIONS
SITEMAP
VIRTUAL CAMPUS
UDC REPOSITORY
MY ACCOUNT
CONTACT
SUGGESTIONS
SITEMAP
VIRTUAL CAMPUS
UDC REPOSITORY
MY ACCOUNT
© 2025  |  Facultade de Ciencias da Comunicación  | Campus de Elviña S/N | CP 15071  | A Coruña | España
© 2023 |  Facultade de Ciencias da Comunicación  | A Coruña | España
 |  |  |  | 