© European Commission 1
 
 
EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
Directorate-General for Education and Culture 
 
Lifelong learning: policies and programme 
School education; Comenius 
 
 
 
 
Education and Training 2020  
Thematic Working Group  
‘Professional Development of Teachers’  
 
 
 
 
Literature review 
Teachers’ core competences:  
requirements and development  
Author: Francesca Caena 
April 2011 

© European Commission 2
Literature review 
Teachers’ core competences:  
requirements and development  
 
General premise 
1 Teaching and learning to teach can be defined as complex, multifaceted, value-laden 
enterprises against the global backdrop of the knowledge society. The continuum of teacher 
learning and teacher education, which turns ou t to be fundamental in a lifelong learning 
perspective, implies the need for an exte nded teacher professionalism (Feiman-Nemser, 
2001, Williamson & McDiarmid, 2008); among the many challenges, there seems to be 
lack of agreement among experts, policy makers and reformers about what is most 
important in teacher preparation – considering the whole range of formal, informal and non-
formal learning opportunities - and where or how it is learnt, as well as great variations in 
the commitment and prior knowledge of teachers (Schwille & Dembélé, 2007). 
2 Teaching-learning processes, a nd learning to teach, can be qua lified as social, contextual 
practices, reflecting ideologies - sets of values about the idea l teacher and citizen, and the 
function of schooling (Cochran-Smith, 2006). A ccording to the latter, it ought to be 
assumed that any teaching, learning or training practice represents a value choice about key 
issues, mediated by institutional trends and ex ternal regulatory mech anisms; the responses 
to these key issues thus imply decisions linked with beliefs, pr iorities and ideals, as well as 
tendencies to maintain or change the present social order.  
3 Because of their institutional nature, educ ational systems and teacher education are 
subjected to influences on di fferent levels; among the key factors accounting for local 
variations, there can be histor ical references, teacher and ci tizen models, learning theories, 
school technologies, admi nistration and management styl es, costs and resources, and 
quality control systems (Cummings, 2003; Tatto, 2006). 
4 Nevertheless, theoretical pers pectives, policies a nd professional practic es, internationally, 
seem to indicate convergence on a few, very broad teacher paradigms or models, which can 
entail a plurality of educational aims and practices: the teacher as instructional manager; 
caring person; expert learne r; cultural and civic person (Altet et al., 1996;  Conway et al., 
2010; Hansen, 2008; Seifert, 1999; Sockett, 2008).  
5 In academic literature and debate, the predomin ant teacher paradigm, globally, seems to be 
the clinician-professional model (Darlin g-Hammond & Bransford, 2005; Shulman, 1987, 
2005; Sockett, 2008), which codifies the bases of professional knowledge for practice, and 
claims to be based on research and the shared perspectives of experts and education 
professionals. The model, which takes after medical professionalism, describes the teacher 
as a reflective practitioner, who actively carries out research and critically deploys scientific 
knowledge to inform practice. Even though severa l references to key features of such a 
paradigm can be traced in most teacher education programmes of teacher education 
providers, as well as in official national documents regarding the competences required of 

© European Commission 3
teachers, the gap between theory and practice, between aims and results often turns out to 
be significant in the specific socio-cultural contexts of teachers’ professional activities. 
1.  Philosophical approa ches and recent trends in the debate on teacher 
competences 
6 A shared definition of teacher skills and knowledge, as a framework to guide teacher 
education and professional development along th e teacher’s career, has been highlighted as 
a key international prio rity, connected to clear objectives  for student learning and a shared 
understanding of accomplished teaching (OECD, 2005).  
1.1.  International/ European  recommendations and studies 
7 EU priorities for improving Teacher Quality and Teacher Education, as defined in the 
Conclusions of the Education Councils of  November 2007, 2008 and 2009, recall the need 
to improve teacher competencies, as well as to promote professional values and attitudes, 
mentioning as examples the following teacher requirements (Council of the European 
Union, 2007, 2008, 2009): 
• a specialist knowledge of subjects 
• pedagogical skills, comprising the following: 
• teach heterogeneous classes 
• use ICT 
• teach transversal competences 
• create safe attractive schools 
• cultures/ attitudes of reflective practice, research, innovation, collaboration, autonomous 
learning. 
8 The Conclusions are underpinned by the Life Long Learning paradigm stated in the Lisbon 
agenda, which underlines the importance of transversal competences (such as digital, 
learning to learn, civic competences) within the eight key ones required in a changing world 
- in particular, the meta-competence of learning to learn (adjusting to change, managing and 
selecting from huge information flows) (C ommission of the European Communities, 2009; 
European Parliament and Council, 2006; European Commission, 2004). 
9 The eight key competences for LLL are defined as follows:  
• Communication in mother tongue  
• Communication in a foreign language  
• Mathematical, scientific, technological literacy 
• Digital competence 
• Learning to learn 
• Interpersonal, civic competences 
• Entrepreneurship 
• Cultural expression. 
10 The issue of the measurability of general a nd transversal competences has been underlined 
in the European working document on key competences (European Commission, 2004), 
which determines the basic, acceptable level of mastery of competences, and leaves room 

© European Commission 4
for the distinction of more advanced levels  of mastery in specif ic situations, thus 
underlining the relevance of contextual fact ors – cultural, social and linguistic ones. 
Competence adequacy, it is suggested, might be st be described as mostly linked to the 
requirements of specific contexts and situ ations. Among the latter, variety in the 
connotations of some key terms in the descri ptors according to diffe rent sociolinguistic 
contexts ought to be taken into account. 1 The European document also highlights the 
interplay of the three areas making up each competence (knowledge, skills, attitudes), as 
well as the overlap between some of the eight competence domains – for instance, 
entrepreneurship and interpersonal, civic and learning to learn competences.  
11 Among the fifteen quality indicators of lifelong learning set for European cooperation, in 
fact, there are references to the new skills fo r the knowledge society; one of the indicators, 
in particular, refers to the learning of t eachers and teacher educators in initial Teacher 
Education (European Commission DG Education and Culture, 2002).  
12 The document ‘Common European Princi ples for Teacher Competences and 
Qualifications’, produced by a working group of Member Stat e experts, classifies three 
broad areas of competence: 
• Working with others 
• Working with knowledge, technology and information 
• Working in and with society. 
13 The first underlines the values of inclusi on embedded in professional values, aimed at 
developing each student’s potential, together wi th interpersonal and cooperative skills, as 
well as psychological-pedagogical knowledge.  
14 The second implies the abilities of retrieving, managing and critically analysing several 
kinds of information, involving digital skills ap plied to professional purposes, together with 
pedagogical and teaching skills. 
15 The third requires teachers to act as res ponsible professionals in local educational 
communities and with different actors, and to  promote the development of students as 
European citizens with global responsibilities,  encouraging dispositio ns and attitudes to 
cooperation and mobility, intercultural dialogue and respect (European Commission DG 
Education and Culture, 2005).  
16 With references to the key role of effective and efficient education and training systems for 
competitivity and cohesion in Europe, the European Comm ission Communication 
Improving the Quality of Teacher Education  stresses teachers’ needed key role as 
facilitators in promoting au tonomous learning and key comp etences development through 
collaborative and individualised approaches , taking on management and decision-making 
roles. The pressing need to ensure shared quality standards for the attractiveness and 
harmonisation of education and training systems in Europe is thus highlighted once again 
(Commission of the European Communities, 2007).  
17 The European Qualifications Framework fo r Life Long Learning, se tting compatibility 
principles for national qualifications systems in Europe, represents a significant outcome of 
European cooperation, in accordance with such a need. Taking stock of relevant national 
                                                 
1  An example can be the ambivalent connotation of ‘compromise’ and ‘tolerance’ in different national cultures.  

© European Commission 5
diversities of education and tr aining cultures within Europe, the descriptors of the eight 
levels in the framework are linked with lear ning outcomes described as knowledge, skills 
and competences (European Communities, 2008).2 
18 Moreover, the European Education Council Conclusions of November 2008 regarding 
European cooperation on schools, in view of th e cross-cutting nature  of key competences 
for LLL to be acquired at the end of educatio n and training, suggest the importance of a 
coherent approach to their development, transcending traditional subject boundaries, and 
improving assessment techniques in personalised learning (OJ 2008/C 319/08). 
19 Among the international studies and projects regarding the definitio n and assessment of 
competences in education and training, the following should be mentioned: 
• OECD’s DeSeCo project (Rychen & Salganik, 2003); 
• the TUNING project (González & Wagenaar, 2005); 
• studies on European Language Teacher Education (Kelly & Grenfell, 2002; Kelly et al., 2004); 
• OECD’s TALIS survey (OECD, 2009). 
20 The first of these – the DeSeCo project - ha s been defined by DeSeCo participants as 
complementary to other international compara tive assessments, such as PISA (Programme 
for International Student Assessment). It can also be connected to Life Long Learning 
policies, in that it aims at defining cross- cultural key competencies, as a framework for 
longer-term assessments of competencies need ed for successful life and a well-functioning 
society. Each key competency, to be qualified as  such, must contribute to valued social and 
individual outcomes; it must help to meet impor tant demands in a wide variety of contexts; 
and it must be important to all individuals 3. It is assumed that a constellation of 
competencies is necessary in any situation. Refl ective thinking and acting are central to this 
framework - the ability to deal with change , learn from experience and have a critical 
stance.  
                                                 
2  Within the framework, which is parallel to the EQF for Higher Educ ation (Dublin Descriptors), teacher 
qualifications descriptors seem to be placed at Level 7 (second-cycle degree level). They include highly 
specialised knowledge and critical awar eness; specialised problem-solving skills in research and innovation; 
competences in managing and transforming complex, unpredictable contexts, as well as contributing to 
professional knowledge and practice, individually a nd participating in/coordinating teamwork (European 
Communities, 2008).  
3  DeSeCo classifies three broad, interconnected categories of competencies, underpinned by common values of 
democracy and sustainability:  
1. use tools interactively 
1a.  use language symbols and text inte ractively (communication, literacy, numeracy) 
1b.  use knowledge and information interactively (scientific literacy) 
1c.  use technology interactively 
2. interact in heterogeneous groups 
2a.  relate well to others (empathy, emotional management) 
2b.  cooperate (present and listen to ideas; debate dynamics; build alliances; negotiate; consider different 
opinions in decisions 
2c.  manage, resolve conflicts 
3.  act autonomously 
3a.  act within the big picture (understand system patterns, rules, expectations; identify consequences of 
actions for action choices 
3b.  form and conduct life plans and personal projects 
3c.  assert rights, interests, limits, needs. 

© European Commission 6
21 Two international stud ies on the objectives and features  of European Language Teacher 
Education, as linked with teacher requirements, have been carried out by the University of 
Southampton for the European Commission. They yield indicat ions of competences (with 
subject area specifications for Languages) on which there is a degree of international 
consensus. They are directly connected to  European policies a bout multilingualism and 
multiculturalism, as interweaved with other key competences (e.g. entrepreneurship), and 
explicitly relying on the Common European  Framework of Reference for Languages. 
Therefore, even if there is the expression of  a subject-based persp ective in describing the 
‘toolbox’ of the European language teacher, th ey have endeavoured to find convergences 
for a common European discourse  on Teacher Education – shared concepts, terminologies 
and tools of analysis.4  
22 The outcome of the 2004 study - the Europe an Profile for Language Teacher Education, 
defined as a frame of reference – aims at promoting teacher quality assurance processes and 
professional mobility, outlining 40 descriptors. In particular, as for the objectives and 
expected outcomes of teacher education, the required teacher competences are outlined in 
27 descriptors, under the headings of knowledge and understanding, strategies and skills, 
and values; most of these descriptors are transversal to the teaching of all subject areas.  
23 The descriptors underline the importance of  digital competences, including pedagogical 
technological content knowledge (PTCK - i.e.  the knowledge of new technologies applied 
to teaching the specific subject) (Mishra & Ko ehler, 2006); learning to learn, reflexive and 
research skills are also highl ighted. European values and attitudes are stressed as key 
requirements: the attention to European citizen ship rights and duties, as well as attitudes 
mirroring and promoting collaboration, coope ration, networking and lifelong learning, as 
linked to transversal skills (Kelly & Grenfell, 2004). 
24 A different approach to looking at teacher co mpetences is by examining the many different 
curricula for Teacher Education, especially Initial Teacher Education. The TUNING project 
(González & Wagenaar, 2005), whic h represents a concrete a pproach to implementing the 
Bologna Process within European  higher education in stitutions and differe nt subject areas, 
has developed a methodology for planning, implementing and evaluating study programmes 
in all three degree levels, ma king them more compatible and comparable within quality 
assurance mechanisms.5  
25 Learning outcomes are thus defined in term s of general and subject-specific competence 6 
descriptors, as shared guidelines for flex ible and autonomous curricular choices by higher 
education providers. The project report underlines  the importance of general, transferable 
                                                 
4  Such a frame of reference is the result of consulta tions with different categories of stakeholders in all 
European countries, by means of mu ltiple methods – including visits a nd interviews in the selected case 
studies as examples of good practices in Teacher Ed ucation, for the developm ent of relevant teacher 
competences. 
5  The project has aimed at finding convergences and common reference points in European higher education 
programmes, involving a great number of university institu tions in most EHEA countries, as well as over 100 
international experts, and dealing with nine subject areas in the first stage. By means of the consultation of the 
main actors in higher education, as  well as the analysis of local cont exts, the project has defined shared 
descriptors of expected study outcomes in terms of competences. 
6  Competences are described as a dynamic combina tion of cognitive and meta-c ognitive skills: knowing and 
understanding; knowing how to act; knowing how to be. They should en tail mobilizing specific skills and 
carrying out tasks, whose successful execution can be evaluated (González & Wagenaar, 2005). 

© European Commission 7
competences - distinguished as instrumental,7 interpersonal8 and systemic9 – as increasingly 
relevant for active participation as European citizens. 
26 Teacher Education, included in the Education Scie nces area, is associated with 15 specific 
competences, described also in terms of skills,  awareness, knowledge and interest; some of 
these are general, transversal competences, such as research competences, or advanced 
cognitive abilities for the development and creation of knowledge.10  
27 OECD’s TALIS international survey on Teach ing and Learning, in building on existing 
studies about teachers’ professional developmen t and teacher effectiveness, links teacher 
quality with pedagogical conten t knowledge, teaching philosophies  or styles (constructivist 
vs. structured), self-efficacy perceptions  and motivation, formative assessment and 
feedback (OECD, 2009, Chapter 2, pp.19-28). The idea of the continuum of teacher 
education and professional de velopment is described as double-sided: the primary 
dimension regards the constant reflection to  update and upgrade practice. The secondary 
one regards teacher features linked with the modernization of the profession: leadership 
features, linked with the attitudes of the teacher as a member of a professional community – 
as a researcher, a receiver of feedback from colleagues, an innovator, as well as an active 
collaborator of colleagues and principal. 
1.2.  Definitions of teacher competences in the literature 
28 The definition of competence, as it is repeatedly sugge sted in relevant literature, should be 
viewed as a holistic concept – the dynami c combination of knowledge, understanding and 
skills, as shown by the following relevant examples: 
• something that can be demonstrated to a certain level of achievement along a continuum 
(González & Wagenaar, 2005);  
• the ability to meet complex demands, by drawing on and mobilising psychosocial resources in 
context – i.e. a complex action system encompassing knowledge (also tacit); cognitive and 
practical skills; attitudes such as motivation, value orientations, emotions ( Rychen & Salganik, 
2003);11 
• the combination of knowledge, skills, attitudes, values and personal characteristics, empowering 
the teacher to act professionally and appropriately in a situation, deploying them in a coherent 
way (Koster & Dengerink, 2008).  
29 As a general premise, it might be useful to  distinguish between teaching competences and 
teacher competences.12 Teaching competences can be desc ribed as focused on the role of 
the teacher in action in the classroom, therefor e directly linked with  the craft of teaching 
                                                 
7  Instrumental competences: cognitive, methodological, technological, linguistic.  
8  Interpersonal competences: individual abilities of expressi ng feelings, critical and self-critical abilities; social 
skills. 
9  Systemic competences: a combination of understanding, sensibility and knowledge; abilities to plan changes 
for systemic improvements. 
10  Other general ones include time management, pr ofessional reflection and self-assessment, effective 
communication with groups and individuals, counselling (i.e. abilities of listening and constructive 
interaction), collaborative problem solving, awareness of the need for continuous professional development.  
11  From this point of view, competence is distinguishe d from skill, which is defined as the ability to perform 
complex acts with ease, precision and adaptability.  
12         The distinction is made in the TALIS survey (OECD TALIS, 2009). 

© European Commission 8
(Hagger & McIntyre, 2006). Teacher competen ces, which imply a wider view of teacher 
professionalism, can be said to consider the multi-faceted roles of the teacher on multiple 
levels – of the individual, of the school, of the local community, of professional networks. 
Even though dispositions seem to be fundamental for both, they seem to play a decisive role 
for teacher competences, as connected to the attitudes to constant professional development, 
innovation and collaboration. This can be seen in the following review, where the two kinds 
of competences, however, often seem to overl ap or interweave – as they often do, in a 
holistic way, in the professional lives and experiences of teachers. 
30 In the following paragraphs, basic teaching co mpetences are taken into account in the first 
place, as summed up by Williamson & McDiarmi d. Afterwards, the review takes into 
account recent perspectives about the n eed for extending requirements in teacher 
professionalism, thus including teacher competences. 
31 Recently, international scholarly consensus seems to converge on the definition of 
competences – also defined as capacities 13 - as basic requirements  for teaching, articulated 
in knowledge, craft skills and dispositions (Feiman-Nemser, 2001; Grant, 2008; Williamson 
McDiarmid & Clevenger-Bright, 2008). Such a definition focuses on the potentialities of 
continuous development and achievement, associated with aims and objectives in a lifelong 
learning perspective, and it specifies requirements for each of the three areas. 
32 The recent review by Williamson and Diarmid, which sums up relevant existing studies, 
mentions the following features in the knowledge area: 
• subject matter knowledge 
• pedagogical subject knowledge14 
• pedagogical knowledge 
• curricular knowledge 
• educational sciences foundations (intercultural, historical, philosophical, psychological, 
sociological knowledge) 
• contextual, institutional, organizational aspects of educational policies 
• issues of inclusion and diversity 
• new technologies 
• developmental psychology 
• group processes and dynamics, learning theories, motivational issues 
• evaluation and assessment processes and methods.  
33 Craft skills consist in the following: 
• planning, managing and coordinating teaching 
• using teaching materials and technologies 
• managing students and groups 
• monitoring and assessing learning 
                                                 
13  The term is increasingly used in a comprehensive way, as a dynamic dimension which goes beyond the 
original scientific connotations of containing and absorbing quantities (Grant, 2008). 
14  Shulman’s definition of pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) includes knowledge concerning curricular 
materials, recurrent difficulties of su bject-specific learning, learning contexts and objectives (Shulman, 1986, 
1987). 

© European Commission 9
• collaborating with colleagues, parents and social services. 
34 Dispositions include beliefs, attitudes, values  and commitment, focused on action; this area 
turns out to be more challengi ng to define, because of the elus ive nature of the criteria for 
defining and assessing the presen ce of dispositions and attit udes for teaching, or the best 
strategies for promoting their development in initial teacher education.  
35 The importance of global influences and professional standards has recently widened 
definitions of professional attitudes for teach ers who need to be able to manage and 
generate changes; therefore, the following aspects ought to be taken into account: 
• epistemological awareness (i.e. about relevant issues of the features and historical development 
of the subject area and its status, as related to other subject areas); 
• dispositions to change; 
• commitment to promoting the learning of all students (Williamson & McDiarmid, 2008). 
36 A recent expansion of the concept of compet ence/ capacity as a requirement for teaching 
reflects increasing academic and policy interest , which focuses attention on the social 
responsibilities of teachers. The key impor tance of PCK (pedagogical content knowledge) 
seems to be borne out by qualitative and quant itative studies, which suggest links between 
the teacher’s PCK and student learning (Schwab, 1962; Hill et al., 2005); moreover, a well-
developed PCK seems to facilitate the individua lization of teaching, of great relevance for 
equity in increasingly diverse classrooms, with a variety of cognitive and cultural profiles 
(McDiarmid, 1993).15  
37 The equity issue, linked with th e role of teachers as social actors, also requires teachers’ 
dispositions to promote students’ democratic  attitudes and practices, as future European 
citizens – which is underlined by the White Pa per of Intercultural Dialogue (Council of 
Europe, 2008). 
38 The situated nature of teacher knowledge , learning and teaching is now widely 
acknowledged, viewing the latter as a practice mediated by social contexts and languages 
(Cochran-Smith, 2006; Giddens, 1984, 1990; Lakoff,  2004). As a consequence, the act of 
teaching is construed as the result of negotia tions, wherein teacher capacities develop and 
are mobilized by means of interactions with ed ucational actors and contexts, in reciprocal 
dynamics between institutional structures, act ions, relationships and teaching tools/ 
materials in specific contexts (Engeström, 1999).  
39 The act of teaching is linked with social and political negotiations regarding contents and 
methods (curricula, assessment strategies, text books and materials), teaching practices and 
choices in the classroom, as well as dependent  on the interactions with several different 
actors and stakeholders. Therefore, negotiating skills turn out to be of key importance for 
teaching, together with collaborative, reflec tive, interpersonal skills for learning in 
professional and school communities (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998), and critical, 
evidence-based attitudes to one’s own practices (McLaughlin & Talbert, 2001). 16 
                                                 
15         In this case, teacher and teaching competences seem to overlap to a certain degree, since PCK, linked with the  
            craft competences of the teacher, is directly connected to the wider social responsibility of the teacher for  
            inclusion and equity.   
16         These perspectives deal more directly with teacher competences. 

© European Commission 10
40 Another recent focus of interest regards th e concept of adaptive expertise applied to 
teaching, as a practice characterized by uncertainty (Bransford et al., 2000; Hatano & Oura, 
2003; Vogt & Rogalla, 2009; Wang, 2001). 17 Adaptive capacity or expertise, in this 
context, consists in the capacity of mon itoring, steering and adapting teaching according to 
pre-requisites, objectives and learning proces ses. Adaptive capacity in teaching is thus 
defined according to a tetra- dimensional model – includin g subject knowledge, learning 
styles diagnostics, methodological knowledge  and classroom management – developed 
transversally according to the capacities of adapting the planning and practice of teaching to 
students’ learning needs.  
41 This underlines, once again, the growing importance of dispositions in teaching, especially 
the disposition to flexibility and ongoing learning, as well as to examining, discussing and 
questioning one’s own practices, in situations of uncertainty, unpredictability, swift change 
and complexity. It also entails the ability to  adapt to multi-level dynamics with cross-
influences – from the macro-level of policie s to the micro-level of students and school 
communities. 18 
42 Moreover, the developing weight of an ‘evi dence culture’ in educational policies and 
practices highlights the significant value, within  school communities, of the ability to draw 
conclusions and take decisions in a collabora tive way, by collecting, analyzing, interpreting 
evidence and data of different nature – learni ng/teaching outcomes in a class or school, as 
well as external assessment/evaluation data - in order to enhance learning and teaching 
(Taylor & Nolen, 2004). 
43 Further contributions to th e conceptualizations of re levant teaching and teacher 
competences come from other research litera ture and studies, concerning socio-cultural 
perspectives on one hand, and effective teac her education and eff ective teaching on the 
other. 
44 Research on teacher learning and thinking as social, supported, situated and distributed 
stresses the importance of socio-cultural an d historical aspects in teaching contexts, 
embedding professional practice within an activity system 19- considering the interplay of 
several factors on multiple levels, from the macro level of national institutions and 
constraints, to the meso-level of school communities, and the micro-level of the individual 
teacher (Borko & Putnam, 2000; Engeström, 1999; Feiman-Nemser, 2008). Such a 
perspective sees the professional action, competences and features of the teacher as shaped 
                                                 
17  The concept of adaptive expertise, applied to differe nt areas, includes meta-cognitive aspects, such as the 
capability of assessing one’s results, as well as identifying and pursuing new learning objectives. Accordingly, 
whoever tackles new problems as opportunities for developing and boosting one’s competences shows 
adaptive expertise and dispositions, and qualifies as different from whoever considers new issues simply as 
opportunities to exercise one’s competences – as the artist can be distinguished from the artisan. 
18        In this perspective, teaching and teacher competences are tightly interweaved. 
19        In the definition of Engeström, an activity system represents a systemic unit of analysis to describe complex  
           socio-cultural practices in education and training contexts. An activity system is described as composed of six  
           elements: the object (the shared aim of the activity - of teaching or training), the tools (the instruments and  
            materials which are produced within a specific socio-cultural context of teaching), the subject (the individual  
            or group directly concerned with the activity), the community (the participants in the activity who share the  
            common object in the socio-cultural context), the division of labour (the division of social roles, the  
            interactions between community members), the rules (the regulations, norms and constraints which shape the  
            processes in the activity system) (Engeström, 1999).  

© European Commission 11
and developed – in a decisive way - by the needs, influences and constraints of multiple, 
embedded socio-cultural contexts. 
45 On the other hand, effective teaching research (Brophy & Good, 1986; Gage, 1989) and 
value-added research (Hanushek, 2002) endeavour  to describe principles of effective 
teachers and effective teaching as linked with student results. 20 Bearing in mind the 
distinction between teacher competences an d teaching competences described before 
(OECD TALIS, 2009), we can then consider pe rspectives coming from studies on effective 
teacher characteristics - which provide a lis t of features of teacher professionalism 21- and 
from studies on effective teachi ng characteristics (i.e. processe s) - which describe features 
of effective teaching on which there is broad consensus.22  
46 As for the latter – effective teaching – we can consider also studies viewing instruction as 
an opportunity for insightful learning (B aumert, Blum & Neubrand, 2001, cit. in OECD 
TALIS, 2009, p.30), which describe an oppor tunity structure as including classroom 
management, the pacing and range of learning opportunities, instructional quality, teacher-
student and student-student relationships. 
47 Furthermore, theoretical perspectives also distinguish effective teaching from good/quality 
teaching (Fenstermacher & Richardson, 2005), underlining the need to encompass 
contextual factors when considering good teaching as morally defens ible/rationally sound, 
in order to define good teaching as separate fr om successful teaching - which indicates that 
learning took place. 
48 Moreover, teacher knowledge research, linked with teacher learning/  cognitive studies 
(Shulman, 1987; Tatto, 2007; Zeic hner, 2008), conceptualizes te acher knowledge domains, 
stressing, once again, the importance of subject knowledge and pedagogical content 
knowledge (PCK) (Krauss et al., 2008).23 
                                                 
20  Such studies are often criticised for the dangers of na rrowing the focus of teacher preparation, concentrating 
on individual teacher performance and underplaying contextual factors.  
21  Teacher professionalism thus include s attitudes (commitment, confidence, trustworthiness, respect), reasoning 
(analytical and conceptual thinking), expectations (drive for improvement, information-seeking, initiative) and 
leadership (flexib ility, accountability, passion for learning) (Anderson , 2004; Hay McBer, 2000); it also 
stresses the importance of an  individual and collective sense of sel f-efficacy (Geijsel et  al., 2009; Goddard, 
Hoy & Hoy, 2000).  
22  Among the principles of effectiv e teaching (Brophy, 2001, cit. in OECD TALIS, 2009, p.29) there are 
references to classroom climate, scaf folding, practice activities, coherent content, cooperative learning, goal-
oriented assessment, strategy teachin g, and achievement expectations. E ffective teaching variables can be 
summed up around six broad concepts: curricular dime nsion, teacher-orchestrated classroom management 
dimension, teaching strategy dime nsion (structured teaching; teachi ng strategies; teaching metacognitive 
strategies), climate dimension, ev aluation/feedback dimension (Scheeren s, 2007). Effective teaching studies 
results seem to point out the success of eclectic teach ing strategies, combining constructivist and direct 
instruction features. This implies pre-structuring and s caffolding, combined with self-regulated learning and 
guided reflection on learning processes. This suggests the effectiveness of a broad spectrum of classroom 
organisational /teaching skills and rich teaching repertoires.  
23  PCK is conceptualized as knowledge of tasks, of students’ prior knowledge, of instructional methods – i.e. 
selection of topics, forms of presentation, analogies, illustrations, examples, explanations and demonstrations; 
understanding of easy/difficult topics and student conceptions/misconceptions; knowledge of appropriate use 
of teaching materials/media; strategic knowledge of application of teachi ng strategies. Deep knowledge about 
content and structure of subject matter is considered a crucial precondition for pedagogical content 
knowledge. (Shulman, 1987). 

© European Commission 12
49 Finally, there is a growing recognition of the value of locally generated knowledge, taking 
place in schools as professional communities of practice and inquiry, overcoming the 
hierarchical distinction between formal, th eoretical knowledge and practical, professional 
knowledge (Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 1993, 2009; Hagger & McIntyre, 2006). 
2.  Teacher competences and professional standards 
50 Describing, defining and assessing teachers’ professional knowledge and competence at any 
career stage is not simple or straightforwar d, neutral or universal, fixed or certain, but 
historically and culturall y bound, subject to change and contestation. Therefore, 
competence statements, so as to recognise the complex, multifaceted nature of teaching, 
acknowledging the role of values , ought to be clear and not over-elaborate (Conway et al, 
2010). This is suggested also by the ETUCE Policy paper, according to which teacher 
competences should be high-level, broadly defined statements of the characteristics of 
teachers at different career stages, and therefor e be built on a concept of teaching as praxis 
interweaving theory, practice and the ability to  reflect critically on one’s own and others’ 
practice (ETUCE, 2008). 
51 A professional standard describes what teacher s are expected to know and be able to do 
(Ingvarson, 1998). Professional standards for teache rs can be considered as representations 
of visions of practice and measuring tools for professional judgement: 
• means for describing a consensus model of wh at is most worth in teaching knowledge and 
practice, as well as instruments for providing specifications of levels of achievement (Kleinhenz 
& Ingvarson, 2004); 
• tools for rendering appropriately precise the maki ng of judgements and decisions in the context 
of shared meanings and values (Sykes and Plastrik, 1993).  
52 According to the latter authors, standards are tools often used to accomplish multiple 
purposes: 
• as uniform measures to organize transactions 
• as rules monitored for compliance 
• as signals that convey information 
• as exemplars that represent ideals 
• as principles that direct action. 
53 Their worth should therefore be judged accord ing to the consequences of their use; 
moreover, the appropriate degree of precision a nd prescriptiveness will vary according to 
the subject of the standard. Standards are ju stified with reference to some system of 
meanings and values as sources of aut hority, which supply the terms and grounds for 
evaluation of the standard itself. However, creating a shared normative frame is a dynamic 
and problematic element of standard setting, by means of political as well as technical 
processes for creating consensus (Sykes and Plastrik, 1993, pp.4-5). 
2.1.  Implications of a standa rd-based approach to teaching 
54 In educational theory and discourse, there are contrasting views on an approach to teaching, 
teacher education and career development base d on competences as professional standards. 
In the context of the drive to wards standard setting coupled w ith educational reform in the 

© European Commission 13
US in the Nineties, Sykes and Plastrik outlined the controversial, sometimes contradictory 
outcomes of the concern with standards in ed ucational contexts, since they might bring 
about discord and fragmentation despite the good intentions of bettering educational results 
by a stable and shared guidance (Sykes & Plastrik, 1993).  
55 Disagreement over the basis for professiona l standards, it is argued, depends on the 
ambivalence inherent in professional work – the discord between la y people who appraise 
professional performance in terms of outco mes, and professionals  who tend to judge 
performance in terms of what is accomplished in relation to contextual constraints of the 
specific situation (Millman & Sykes, 1992).  
2.1.1  Positive perspectives on pr ofessional standards for teachers 
56 Positive perspectives consider standards as in strumental to encouraging the reconciliation 
of divergent views (Kleinhenz & Ingvarson, 20 04); as a consequence, they become linked 
to academics’ legitimation of teacher knowledge bases and of the teaching profession.  
57 If well written, standards should focus on what pupils should be learning as a result of 
teaching conditions; as measures of professional competence, they should define what to 
measure, how to collect evidence, and what counts as performance standard. 
58 They can be effective tools for quality contro l about entry, training and practice (Yinger & 
Hendricks-Lee, 2000); however, a useful distin ction should be made between generic and 
specified standards, content and performance. Loosely defined, broad standards invite local 
interpretations, while operationalised, detailed  standards enable us to make judgements 
(Thrupp, 2006). 
59 It has also been argued that: 
• agreed standards establish internal control by the profession over training, entry and practice, 
allowing the profession to consolidate its legitimacy; 
• the pressure on the teacher to interpret her classroom practice with reference to the parameters 
set by the standard guards against teaching being seen as an idiosyncratic activity to which some 
are born and some are not. (Yinger & Hendriks-Lee, 2000); 
• standards and competences can provide a basis for developing valid systems for teacher 
accountability and performance, and as vehicles for professional learning (Kleinhenz and 
Ingvarson 2007);  
• standards-based teacher evaluation systems can lead to enhanced professional learning if they 
allow teachers to play an active role in self-directed enquiry (Darling-Hammond, 2000; Pyke & 
Lynch, 2005; Danielson & McGreal, 2000).  
2.1.2.  Criticism of t eacher standards culture 
60 Critics of standards culture raise the objecti on that teacher standards can imply taking on a 
neutral, technical perspective, overlooking the nature of teacher knowledge as context- and 
person-bound. This perspective could lead to making linear and causal connections between 
teacher behaviours and student outcomes, with the danger of forgetting contextual factors 
(Ball, 2003; Pring, 2004). 
61 Other criticisms are that such approaches: 
• ‘atomise and fragment the teacher’s role rather than representing it as in integrated and coherent 
whole’ (Brundrett, 2000); 

© European Commission 14
• emphasise measurable behaviours and outcomes to the neglect of more subtle qualities and 
situational factors;  
• privilege the standard-setter’s voice over the teachers’ diverse voices;  
• forget the distributed or shared nature of teaching competences (Conway et al, 2010). 
• through an instrumentalist and prescriptive approach, lead to a situation where ‘the work of 
teachers is reconfigured so they become the deliverers of knowledge, testers of student 
outcomes and pedagogical technicians’ (Smyth & Dow, 1998); or 
• through ‘the specification of objectives, performance reviews (…) may encourage teachers to 
behave in ways that are antithetical to certain fundamental educational values such as altruism, 
intellectual independence ...’ (Olssen et al, 2004). 
62 In fact, values underpinning standard statements have often been found to overlook or 
simplify the complexity in teaching and lear ning (Eraut, 1994; Korthagen, 2004; Zeichner, 
2005). Since the standards culture has been  defined by some critics as the re-
conceptualization of previous  perspectives connected with  process-product research and 
effective teacher performance, the risks of  deprofessionalisation and fragmentation in 
conceptualizations of teacher’s roles have been underlined (Cochran-Smith, 2006).  
63 The outcomes of cognitive research on teach er knowledge, in fact, have suggested the 
importance of teachers’ construction of new knowledge, in response to different contextual 
needs (Hagger & McIntyre, 2006). Moreover, te aching for understanding and critical skills 
requires a different assessment of learning outcomes from transmission, content-based 
models of teaching; standards-based di scourse and assessment by educational or 
institutional actors involved in quality co ntrol processes might thus combine with 
underlying transmission teaching concepts, which might seem more easily compatible with 
a standards view as focused on the technical sk ills of teaching and the link with measurable 
student outcomes. The risks of undermining the variety and creativity of teacher practices, 
reducing responsiveness to student needs, have thus been pointed out.  Finally, some raise 
objections to the use of standards as meas uring tools for professional assessment linked 
with career incentives, since they might reduce teacher autono my and attitudes to critical 
reflection on one’s own values (Menter et al., 2010). 
2.3.  National policies and approa ches to teacher competences and 
professional standards 
64 There seems to be a huge variety of approaches to the definition and implementation of 
teacher competence frameworks in national e ducational policies, ranging from a ‘light 
touch’ definition of broad competence se ts (e.g. Finland, and recently France) to 
prescriptive lists, linked with  professional standards and career advancement (e.g. New 
Zealand, the UK and the US).  
65 In teacher education and educational policies,  two contrasting approaches about standards 
can be outlined, as regards the ways in which they are used and the consequences for 
teachers: 
• a bureaucratic and technical approach for accountability purposes, focused on measuring, 
monitoring, comparing and regulating individual behaviour;  

© European Commission 15
• a developmental use, with loose definitions of competences as indicative of performance, 
stressing principles and codes of practice in a complex, situated, relational, socio-cultural 
activity like teaching. 
66 The first perspective can be associated with the skills-based approach in the UK or the US, 
which has often been criticised. Scholars quest ion the rationale for st andards, focused on 
individual teachers’ performance, rather than on holistic professional development (Apple, 
2005); in the US, the so-called ‘s tandard stampede’ would thus drain life from education, 
through an inordinate and excessive preoccupa tion with technical standards (Sergiovanni, 
2000). In the UK, experts point ou t that standards seem to have  been recruited to underline 
content and marginalise matters linked with  values, attitudes and personal qualities 
(Furlong et al., 2000; Hargreaves et al., 2001). 
67 The second view sees standards as descri ptive tools for reflection, sense making and 
guiding professional action, help ing to identify developmenta l opportunities and needs at 
individual and school level (Conway et al., 2010; Darling-Hammond, 2000; Pyke and 
Lynch, 2005). 
68 Studies on the functions and impact of the teac her standards culture in  different countries 
show wide variations in standards implement ation and use, according to the contexts and 
the responsibilities for judgement. On the whole, the presence of teacher standards seems to 
be no guarantee of actual qual ity standards, since “the devil is in the interpretation” 
(Conway et al., 2010; Koster & Dengerink, 2008; Mahony & Hextall, 2000).  
2.4.  Studies on teacher expertise and competence levels development  
69 An issue in the teacher standards and comp etences debate, which especially concerns 
stakeholders and decision-makers who ar e responsible for policy development and 
implementation, regards the possibility of reaching international consensus on a framework 
which manages to describe different levels of teacher expertise, taking into account all 
relevant aspects of such a multifaceted activity.  
70 The TUNING approach has endeavoured to wo rk towards such a go al, by defining level 
descriptors for each degree cycle in severa l subject areas, including Education; the 
possibility of developing sublevel descriptor s has been debated by project participants, but 
without coming to a final conclu sion. Competence descriptors, it  is underlined in the final 
TUNING report, are meant as reference points for evaluation, not straig htjackets, allowing 
for flexibility while providing a common language. 24 
71 Research strands on beginning teachers and the differences between novice and expert 
teachers have given insights into features of teacher expertise and st ages of professional 
development and concerns (Berliner, 2001, 2004; Burn, Hagger, Mutton & Everton, 2000; 
Conway & Clark, 2003; Darling-Hammond & Bransford, 2005; Goodson & Hargreaves, 
1996; Hagger & McIntyre, 2006; Hobson et al ., 2006; Poulou, 2007; Brekelmans, Wubbels 
and van Tartwijk, 2005). 
72 First of all, teacher expertise seems slow to deve lop, requiring at least three to five years; in 
fact, it requires teaching as a deliberate, re flexive, purposeful practice and high quality 
                                                 
24  The following sublevels distinction has been mentioned in the project report: for 1 st cycle degree programmes, 
basic, intermediate, advanced sublevels; for 2nd level degree programmes, advanced and specialized sublevels. 

© European Commission 16
feedback. This emphasizes the im portance of professional suppor t at the beginn ing, in the 
crucial induction period; this priority is increasingly bei ng acknowledged in recent reforms 
and national policies in Europe. 
73 The key features of teacher expertise - or pr ofessionalism, as French scholars prefer to 
define it (Perrenoud, 1994; Altet et al., 1996) can be summed up as follows:  
• the routinisation of teaching activities – i.e. , the development of patterns of action,25 and 
teaching repertoires; 
• the sensitivity to social demands of the classroom and the recognition of classroom dynamics;  
• flexibility and improvisation;  
• understanding problems;  
• domain-and subject- specific expertise in recognising patterns in the complexity of classroom 
life. 
74 In fact, a double agenda of interdependent f unctions seems to be involved in teaching – a 
diachronic, reasoned, deliberate and slow function for decisions on objectives; a synchronic, 
automatized, economical and fluid function for interactive routines in class (Berliner, 1987).  
75 The personal and extremely complex nature of  teacher’s practical thinking – professional 
craft knowledge - is highlighted, as characterized by mostly t acit thoughts and decisions in 
classroom interaction (Hagger & McIntyre, 2006) . If the effectiveness of professional craft 
knowledge depends on personal judgement, holistic schemata and tacit knowledge, it can be 
inferred that the development of such expe rtise requires elaborate, demanding cognitive 
processes especially at the beginning of th e career, when teachers are performing without 
the necessary classroom experience and knowledge  for a critical, informed and systematic 
examination of their practices by comparing and interrogating several sources. Such an 
activity appears problematic, since every action of the teacher turns out to be value-laden 
and connected to deeply rooted beliefs.  
76 The critical examination of one’s own teaching,  therefore, requires pr ocesses of ‘practical 
theorizing’ which turn out to be more easily carried out in school contexts, by means of 
classroom practices and professional dialogue: it  entails a critical analysis of one’s own 
practical ideas, rather resistant to change  as underpinned by individual value judgements 
and theoretical premises on priorities in teaching strategies and aims.  
77 Two basic requirements are underlined as f undamental, minimum objectives for preparing 
quality teachers:  
• the capability of systematic assessment of one’s own professional knowledge and practices on 
the basis of a wide range of criteria coming from practice, theory and research; 
• critical and responsive attitudes to innovation and professional improvement (Hagger & 
McIntyre, 2006).  
                                                 
25  In French literature, the concept of habitus is employed to describe the ‘struc turing structure’ that allows the 
teacher to face a wide variety of situations, with slight adaptations. It involves patterns of action as ‘patterns of 
perception, assessment and decision’, which activate knowledge (in French, savoirs), transforming it into 
competence. The concept of savoirs is then described as ‘multidimensional, dynamic organizations of 
meanings with affective connotations, attributed to subjects, classes, rela tionships or structures in specific 
situations’ (Altet et al., 1996; Perrenoud, 1994). 

© European Commission 17
78 Finally, studies on teacher lear ning and development seem to show that teacher concerns 
might follow recurring patterns of development,  but are mostly linked with deeply rooted 
beliefs and attitudes, as well as socio-cultural context dynamics.  
79 Socio-cultural influences are linked to the cont exts and conditions of acquisition and use of 
professional knowledge, which incl ude subject- and student- speci fic aspects. The focus of 
interest thus shifts from i ndividual changes and developments  in teacher preparation and 
progression to the interactions between teach ers and different learning contexts, and the 
significance of the latter in promoting or hindering evolutions (Borko & Putman, 1996).  
80 As for general tendencies in the developmen t of teacher thinking according to expertise 
development, study results are contrasting; nevertheless, they seem to point out the 
tendency of interests and priorities of teach ers to moving outwards – from self-centred 
concerns for classroom survival to attenti on given to student learning (Furlong & Maynard, 
1995). 
 

© European Commission 18
References 
Altet, M., Chartier, E., Paquay, L. & Perrenoud, P. (1996). Former des enseignants professionnels. 
Quelles strategies? Quelles compétences? Paris: De Boeck &Larcier. 
Anderson, L.W. (2004), Increasing Teacher Effectiveness.(2nd edition) Paris: UNESCO, IIEP. 
Apple, M. W. (2005). Education, markets, and an audit culture. Critical Quarterly, 47: 11–29. 
Arnove, R.F. & Torres, C.A  (1999). Comparative Education. The Dialectic of the Global and the Local. 
New York: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Attard Tonna, M. (2007). Teacher education in a globalised age. Journal for Critical Education Policy 
Studies, 5 (1) <http://www.jceps.com/index.php?pageID= article& articleID=88>  
Ball, D. L. (2003). Mathematics in the 21st century: What math ematics knowledge is needed for teaching 
mathematics? Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Education. 
Baumert, J., Blum, W. & Neubrand, M. (2001). Su rveying the instructional conditions and domain-
specific individual prerequisites for the development of mathematical competencies. Paper presented at 
the special meeting on the co-ordination of nationa l teacher components for PISA 2003, 28 May 2001, 
Munich, Germany. 
Borko, H. & Putman, R.T. (1996). Learning to Teach. In Berliner, D. & Calfee, R. (Eds.). Handbook of 
Educational Psychology. New York: Simon & Shuster Macmillan. 
Bransford, J.D., Brown A.L. & Cocking R.R. (Eds.)(2000). How People Learn. Brain, Mind, Experience 
and School. Washington: National Academy Press. 
Brekelmans, M., Wubbels, T., & Tartwijk, J. van (2005). Teacher-student relationships across the teaching 
career. In Th. Wubbels (Ed.) Student perceptions  of teacher-student relationships in class. International 
Journal of Educational Research, 43, pp 55-71.  
Brophy, J.E. & Good, T.L. (1986). Teacher behaviour and student achievement. In Wittrock, M.C. (Ed.) 
Handbook of Research on Teaching (3rd edition). New York: Macmillan. 
Brophy, J. (2001). Generic Aspects of Effective Teaching. In Wang, M.C. and Walberg, H.J. Tomorrow’s 
Teachers. McCutchan Publishing Company. 
Brundrett, M. (2000) The question of competence: the origins, strengths and inadequacies of an 
educational paradigm. School Leadership and Management, 20, 4: 353 – 370.  
Brundrett, M. (2000) Beyond Competence: The Challenge for Educational Management . King’s Lynn: 
Peter Francis Publishing.  
Burn, K., Hagger, H., Mutton, T. & Everton, T. (2 000). Beyond concerns with self. The sophisticated 
thinking of beginning students teachers. Journal of Education for Teaching, 26,3, 259-78. 
Cochran-Smith, M. (2006). Policy, Practice, and Politics in Teacher Education. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Corwin Press. 
Cochran-Smith, M. and Lytle, S. L. (1993) Inside Out: Teacher Research and Knowledge . New York: 
Teachers College. 
Cochran-Smith, M. and Lytle, S. L. (Eds.) (2009) Inquiry as Stance. Practitioner Research for the Next 
Generation. New York: Teacher College Press. 
Conway, P.F. & Clark, C.M.(2003). The journey in ward and outward: A re-examination of Fuller’s 
concern-based model of teacher development. Teaching and Teacher Education, 19, 465-82. 

© European Commission 19
Conway, P.F., Murphy, R., Rath, A. & Hall, K. (2009). Learning to Teach and its Implications for the 
Continuum of Teacher Education: A Nine-Country Cr oss-National Study. Report Commissioned by the 
Teaching Council. University College Cork and Teaching Council of Ireland. 
Council of the European Union (2007a). Conclusions of the Council and of the Representatives of the 
Governments of the Member States, meeting within the Council, on improving the quality of teacher 
education (Official Journal C 300, 12.12.2007). 
Council of the European Union, C 300 (2007b). Co uncil Resolution of 15 November 2007, on education 
and training as a key driver of the Lisbon strategy. 
Council of the European Union (2008a). Council Conclusions on  preparing young people for the 21 st 
century: an agenda for European cooperation on schools. Brussels, 21 November 2008.  
Council of the European Union (2008b). Council C onclusions on preparing young people for the 21 st 
century: an agenda for European cooperation on schools. Brussels, 21 November 2008. 
Council of the European Union (2009a). Conclusion s of the Council and of the Representatives of the 
Governments of the Member States, meeting within the Council of 26 November 2009 on the professional 
development of teachers and school leaders (OJ 2009/C 302/04) 
Council of the European Union, C 302/3 (2009b). C onclusions of the Council and of the Representatives 
of the Governments of the Member States, meeting within the Council, of 26 November 2009 on 
developing the role of education in a fully- functioning knowledge triangle. 
Council of Europe - Committee of Minist ers of Foreign Affairs (7 May 2008). White Paper of 
Intercultural Dialogue: Living together as equals in Dignity. Strasbourg: Council of Europe . 
Crossley, M. & Watson, K. (2003). Comparative and International Research in Education. Globalisation, 
context and difference. London: Routledge. 
Cummings, W.K. (2003). The InstitutionS of Education. A Comparative Study of Educational 
Development in the Six Core Nations. Providence, MA: Symposium Books. 
Danielson, C. & McGreal, T. (2000). Teacher Evaluation to enhance professional practice. Alexandria, 
VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Darling-Hammond, L. (2000). Teacher Quality and Student Achievement. Educational Policy Analysis 
Archives, Vol. 8, No. 1. 
Darling-Hammond, L. (2000). Solving the Dilemmas of Teacher Supply, Demand, and Standards: How 
We Can Ensure a Competent, Caring, and Qualified Teacher for Every Child . New York, NY: National 
Commission on Teaching and America’s Future, 2000. 
Darling-Hammond, L. & Bransford, J. (Eds.) (2005). Preparing teachers for a changing world. Report of 
the Committee on Teacher Education of the National Academy of Education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Engeström, Y. (1999). Activity theory and individua l and social transformati on. In Engeström, Y. 
Miettinen, R. & Punamäki, R.-J.(Eds.). Perspectives on activity theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Eraut, M. (1994). Developing Professional Knowledge and Competence. Falmer: London.  
ETUCE (European Trade Union Committee for Education) (2008). Teacher Education in Europe. An 
ETUCE Policy Paper. Brussels: ETUCE.  
European Commission DG Education and Culture (2002). European Report on Quality Indicators of 
Lifelong Learning. Brussels, June 2002 <http://www.bologna-berlin2003.de/pdf/Report.pdf> 

© European Commission 20
European Commission (2004). Implementation of ‘Education and Training 2010’ Work programme. Key 
Competences for Lifelong Learning. A European Reference Framework. Brussels, November 2004 . 
<http://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/2010/doc/basicpaper2004.pdf>  
European Commission DG Education and Culture (2005). Common European Principles for Teacher 
Competences and Qualifications.  Brussels <http://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/ 
2010/doc/principles_en.pdf> 
European Commission (2007); Communication from the European Commission to the European 
Parliament: Improving the Quality of Teacher Education, Brussels August 2007 
European Commission. Communication from the Commi ssion to the European Parliament, the Council, 
the European Economic and social comm ittee and the committee of the regions. Key Competences for a 
changing world. COM (2009) 640 final. Brussels, 25.11.2009.  
European Communities (2008). The European Qualifications Framework for Lifelong Learning (EQF) . 
Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities. 
European Parliament and Council (2006). Decision No 1720/2006/EC of 15 November 2006, establishing 
an action programme in the field of lifelong learning. Official Journal of the European Union, 24.11.2006.  
Feiman-Nemser, S. (2001). From preparation to practi ce: designing a continuum to strengthen and sustain 
teaching. Teachers College Record, 103 (6), 1013-1055.  
Feiman-Nemser, S. (2008). Teacher Learning. How do Teachers learn to teach?  In Cochran-Smith, M, 
Feiman-Nemser, S., McIntyre, D. (Eds.). Handbook of research on Teacher Education. Enduring 
Questions in Changing Contexts. New York/Abingdon: Routledge/ Taylor & Francis. 
Furlong, J. & Maynard, T. (1995). Mentoring Student Teachers. London/New York: Routledge.  
Furlong, J., Barton, L., Miles, S., Whiting, C. & Whitty, G. (2000). Teacher Education in Transition. 
Buckingham: Open University Press.  
Gage, N. (1978). The Scientific Basis of the Art of Teaching. New York: Teachers College Press. 
Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society.  Outline of the theory of structuration. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Giddens, A.(1990). The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity. 
Goddard, R.D., Hoy, W.K. and Hoy, A.W. (2000). Coll ective teacher efficacy: Its meaning, measure, and 
impact on student achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 37, 479-507. 
González, J. & Wagenaar, R. (Eds.) (2005). Tuning Educational Structures in Europe II. Universities’ 
contribution to the Bologna Process. University of Deusto & University of Groningen. 
Grant, G.E. (1992). The source of structural  metaphors in teacher knowledge: three cases. Teaching and 
Teacher Education, 8 (5/6), 433-40.  
Hansen, D.T. (2008a). Values and purpose in teacher education. In Cochran-Smith, M., Feiman-Nemser, 
S., McIntyre, D. (Eds.). Handbook of Research on Teacher Educati on. Enduring questions in changing 
contexts. New York/Abingdon: Routledge/Taylor & Francis. 
Fenstermacher, G.D. & Richardson, V. (2001). Manner in teaching: the study parts. Journal of Curriculum 
Studies, 33 (6), 631-639.  
Geijsel, F., Sleegers, P., Stoel, R. and Krüger, M.  (2009). The Effect of Teacher Psychological, School 
Organizational and Leadership Factors on Teacher s’ Professional Learning in Dutch Schools. The 
Elementary School Journal, 109(4), 406-427. 
Goodson, I.F. & Hargreaves, A. (1996). Teachers’ Professional Lives. London: Falmer.  

© European Commission 21
Hagger, H. & McIntyre, D. (2006). Learning teaching from teachers. Realizing the potential of school-
based teacher education. Maidenhead: Open University Press.  
Hanushek, E. A. (2002). The Long Run Importance of School Quality. NBER Working Papers 9071, 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. 
Hanushek, Eric A (1996). Measuring Investment in Education. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
American Economic Association, vol. 10(4), pages 9-30, Fall.  
Hargreaves, A., Earl, L., Moore, S. & Maning, S. (2001). Learning to Change: Teaching Beyond Subjects 
and Standards. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.  
Hatano, G. & Oura, Y. (2003). Commentary: rec onceptualizing school learning using insight from 
expertise research. Educational Researcher, 32 (8), 26-29. 
Hay McBer (2000). Research into teacher effectiveness: A model of teacher effectiveness. Research report 
No. 216. Norwich: The Crown Copyright Unit. 
Hill, H., Rowan, B. & Ball, D. (2005). Effects of  teachers’ mathematical knowledge for teaching on 
student achievement. American Educational Research Journal, 42 (2), 371-406.  
Hobson, A.J., Malderez, A., Tracey, L., Giannakaki, M., Pell, G. & Tomlinson, P.D. (2008). Student 
teachers' experiences of initial teacher preparation in England: core themes and variation. Research papers 
in education, 23, 4, December 2008, 407-433. 
Ingvarson, L. (1998). "Professional sta ndards: a challenge for the AATE?" English in Australia, 122: 31-
44. 
Kelly, M., Grenfell, M., Gallagher-Brett, A., Jones,  D., Richard, L. & Hilmarsson-Dunn A. (2002). The 
Training of Teachers of a Foreign Language: Devel opments in Europe. A Report to the European 
Commission DG Education and Culture. University of Southampton, UK. 
Kelly, M. & Grenfell, M. (2004). European Profile for Language Teac her Education. A Frame of 
Reference. University of Southampton, UK. 
Kleinhenz, E. and Ingvarson, L. (2004) Teacher account ability in Australia: current policies and practices 
and their relation to the improvement of teaching and learning.  Research Papers in Education, 19(1), 31-
49. 
Kleinhenz, E. & Ingvarson, L. (2007). Standards for Teaching. Theoretical Underpinnings and 
Applications. New Zealand Teachers Council. 
<www.teacherscouncil.govt.nz/communication/publications/research0012.pdf>  
Korthagen, F. (2004). In search of the essence of a good teacher: towards a more holistic approach in 
teacher education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 20, 77-97. 
Koster, B. and Dengerink, J. J.(2008). Professional sta ndards for teacher educators: how to deal with 
complexity, ownership and function.  Experiences from the Netherlands. European Journal of Teacher 
Education, 31:2, 135-149. 
Krauss, S., Brunner, M., Kunter, M., Baumert, J., Blum, W., Neubrand, M. & Jordan, A. (2008). 
Pedagogical Content Knowledge and Content Knowledge of Secondary Mathematics Teachers. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 100(3), 716-725. 
Lakoff, R. (2000). The Language War. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Mahony, P. & Hextall, I. (2000). Reconstructing Teaching. London: Routledge. 

© European Commission 22
McDiarmid, G.W. (1993). Teacher Education: a vital part of the equity issue, State Education Leader, 12 
(1), 11. 
McLaughlin, M. & Talbert, J. (2001). Professional communities and the work of high-school teaching. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Menter, I., Hulme, M., Elliot, D. & Lewin, J. (2010). Literature Review on Teacher Education in the 21 st 
Century. Edinburgh: Educational Analytical Services, Scottish Government Social Research. 
Millman, J. & Sykes, G. (1992). The assessment of teaching based on evidence of student learning: An 
analysis. Washington, DC: National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.  
OECD (2005). Teachers Matter: Attracting, Developi ng and Retaining Effective Teachers. Paris: OECD 
publications <http://www.oecd.org/edu/teacherpolicy >  
OECD (2009). Creating Effective Teaching and Learning En vironments. First Results from TALIS. Paris: 
OECD Publications <http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/17/51/43023606.pdf> 
Ollsen, M., Codd, J. & O’Neill, A.M. (2004). Education Policy: Globalization, Citizenship and 
Democracy. London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: Sage Publications. 
Perrenoud, P. (1993). Formation initiale des maîtres et professionnalisation du métier. Revue des Sciences 
de l’ Éducation, XIX (1), 59-76. 
Perrenoud, P (1994). Compétences, habitus et savoirs professionnels. European Journal of Teacher 
Education, 17 (1-2), 45-48. 
Poulou, M. (2007). Student Teachers’ concerns about teaching practice. European Journal of Teacher 
Education, 30, 1, 91-110.  
Pring, P. (2004). Teaching and the good teacher. In F. Inglis (Ed.) Education and the Good Society . (pp. 
75-87). London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Putnam, R. T., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new vi ews of knowledge and thinking have to say about 
research on teacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4-15. 
Pyke, C. L. & Lynch, S. (2005). Mathematics and Sc ience Teachers' Preparati on for National Board of 
Professional Teaching Standards Certification. School Science and Mathematics, 105: 25–35. 
Rychen, D.S. & Salganik, L.H. (2003). Key Competencies for a successful life and a well-functioning 
society. Göttingen: Hogrefe & Huber 
Scheerens, J. (2007). Conceptual framework for the development of the PISA 2009 context questionnaires 
and thematic reports. OECD, paper for the PISA Governing Board. 
Schwab, J.J. (1962). The concept of a structure of a discipline. Educational Record, 43, 197-205. 
Schwille, J. & Dembélé, M. (2007). Global perspectives on teacher learning: improving policy and 
practice. Paris: UNESCO. 
Seifert, K. L. (1999). Reflective thinking and professional development. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.  
Sergiovanni, T. (2000). The Lifeworld of Leadership. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.  
Shulman, L.S. (1986). Those who understand: knowledge growth in teaching. Educational Researcher, 15 
(2), 4-14. 
Shulman, L.S. (1987). Knowledge and T eaching: foundations of the new reform. Harvard Educational 
Review, 57 (1), 1-22. 

© European Commission 23
Shulman, L.S. (2005). The signature pedagogies of the professions of law, medicine, engineering, and the 
clergy: potential lessons for the education of teachers. Talk at the Math Science Partnerships workshop: 
Teacher Education for effective teaching and learning. Irvine, CA.  
Smyth, J. & Dow, A. (1998). What’s wrong with outco mes? Spotter planes, action plans and steerage of 
the educational workplace. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 19, 291-303. 
Sockett, H. (2008). The moral and epistemic purpo ses of teacher education. In Cochran-Smith, M., 
Feiman-Nemser, S., Mc Intyre, D. (Eds.). Handbook of Research on Teacher Education. Enduring 
questions in changing contexts. New York/Abingdon: Routledge/ Taylor & Francis. 
Sykes, G., & Plastrik, P. (1993). Standard setting as e ducational reform. (Trends and Issues Paper no. 8). 
Washington, DC: ERIC Clearinghouse on Teacher Education and American Association of Colleges for 
Teacher Education. ED 358 068  
Tatto, M.T. (2006). Education Reform and the global re gulation of teachers’ education, development and 
work: A cross-cultural analysis. International Journal of Educational Research, 45, 231-241. 
Tatto, M.T. (2007). Reforming Teaching Globally. Didcot: Symposium Books.  
Taylor, C. & Nolen, S. (2004). Classroom assessment. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice. 
Thrupp, M. (2006). Professional Standards for Teachers  and Teacher Education. Avoiding the Pitfalls. 
PPTA, University of Waikato.  
Vogt, F. & Rogalla, M. (2009). Developing Ad aptive Teaching Competency through coaching.  Teaching 
and Teacher Education, 25 (8), 1051-1060. 
Wang, M.C. (2001). Adapting instruction: building on diversity. Theory into practice, 19 (2), 122-128. 
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Williamson McDiarmid, G. & Clevenger-Bright M. (2008). Rethinking Teacher Capacity . In Cochran-
Smith, M., Feiman-Nemser, S. & Mc Intyre, D. (Eds.). Handbook of Research on Teacher Education. 
Enduring questions in changing contexts. New York/Abingdon: Routledge/Taylor & Francis. 
Yinger, R.J. & Hendricks-Lee, M.S. (2000). The langua ge of standards and teacher education reform. 
Educational Policy, 14(1), 94-106 <http://epx.sagepub.com/content/14/1/94> 
Zeichner, K. (2005). A research agenda for teacher education. In Cochran-Smith, M. & Zeichner, K. 
(Eds.). Studying teacher education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Zeichner, K. (2008). Settings for t eacher education. In Cochran-Smith M., Feiman-Nemser, S. & Mc 
Intyre, D. (Eds.). Handbook of Research on Teacher Education.  Enduring questions in changing contexts. 
New York/Abingdon: Routledge/Taylor & Francis. 

© European Commission 24
Annexe 
Teacher competence frameworks: three international perspectives  
A.  European Profile of Language  Teacher Education. A Frame of 
Reference (Kelly et al., 2002; Kelly & Grenfell, 2004) 
 
81 The European study of 2004 outlines the proposal  of a reference framework for assessment and 
programme evaluation in Language Teacher Educa tion, describing the toolbox of competences of 
the European language teacher – in terms of li nguistic, didactic, cognitive abilities and technical 
skills. It follows up the results of the preparator y study of 2002, which defined a common core of 
knowledge, skills and values, as well as structure features, of a desirable European Profile of 
Language Teacher Education; both studies are therefore complementary to and compatible with 
Bologna process objectives and EQF descriptors, running parallel to the work of the TUNING 
project in defining expected learning outcomes in terms of competences. 
82 The profile is to be considered in a holistic and mu ltidisciplinary perspective; it is also suggested as 
useful to promote the awareness of the European  dimension in teacher education, and of the 
processes for ongoing teacher learning. As in the TUNING approach, guidelines for quality 
assurance complete the profile, clarifying and defi ning objectives, expected outcomes, transferable 
skills, methods and activities, assessment modes and critical issues.  
83 In the following excerpt only 27 descriptors out of  40 are reported – the ones related to Knowledge 
and Understanding, Strategies and skills and Va lues are reported, while the 13 descriptors 
concerning the structure of European Language Teacher Education are omitted. 
84 It can be seen that most subject-specific descriptors  (in italics) can have a transversal relevance also 
in other subject areas – e.g. abilities linked to self-directed, independent language learning, the 
usage of European documents such  as the European Language Portfolio, or the teaching of another 
subject in a foreign language.  
 
European Profile of Language Teacher Education. A Frame of Reference 
(excerpt, focusing on expected learning outcomes of teacher education) 
 Knowledge and Understanding  
• Language teaching methodologies, and state-of-the-art classroom techniques and activities 
• Development of a critical and enquiring approach to teaching and learning 
• Language proficiency  
• Information and communication technology for pedagogical use in the classroom 
• Information and communication technology for personal planning, organisation and resource  
• discovery 
• Application of various assessment procedures and ways of recording learners’ progress 
• Critical evaluation of nationally or regionally adopted curricula in terms of aims, objectives  
• and outcomes 

© European Commission 25
• Theory and practice of internal and external programme evaluation 
 Strategies and Skills  
• Ways of adapting teaching approaches to the educational context and individual needs of 
• learners 
• Critical evaluation, development and practical application of teaching materials and 
• resources 
• Methods of learning to learn 
• Development of reflective practice and self-evaluation 
• Development of independent language learning strategies 
• Ways of maintaining and enhancing ongoing personal language competence 
• Practical application of curricula and syllabuses 
• Peer observation and peer review 
• Developing relationships with educational institutions in appropriate countries 
• Action research 
• Incorporating research into teaching 
• Content and Language Integrated Learning (CLIL) 
• Use of the European Language Portfolio for self-evaluation 
 Values 
• Social and cultural values 
• Diversity of languages and cultures 
• Importance of teaching and learning about foreign languages and cultures 
• Teaching European citizenship 
• Team-working, collaboration and networking, inside and outside the immediate school  
• context 
• Importance of life-long learning 
B.  The TUNING approach – Educat ion Sciences subject area: Teacher 
Education (González & Wagenaar, 2005) 
85 The TUNING final report, in describing an appro ach to the implementation of the Bologna process 
with the design of higher education study progr ammes as compatible and comparable in Europe, 
stresses the multidisciplinary nature of the subject area of Education - and of Teacher Education in 
particular, where teaching subjects are used to e xplicate the nature of teaching, learning and 
assessment in a wide variety of socio-economical contexts. Moral and ethical values, because of the 
human focus of the subject, are highly prioritised.  
86 The competences as expected learning outcomes descr ibed in the TUNING project are compatible 
with the European Qualification Framework and the Dublin descriptors for Higher Education26.  
                                                 
26  The Dublin Descriptors for academic degrees in the th ree levels of the Bologna Process are grouped according 
to the following areas: knowledge and understanding; applying knowledge and understanding; making 
judgements; communication; learning skills. They express expected competences on completion of each 

© European Commission 26
87 The TUNING report presents a list of 15 specific competences for the Teacher Education area, 
developed by the Education Sciences Working Gr oup, and evaluated in a survey of students, 
academics and employers. The specific competence s list integrates the framework of level cycle 
descriptors, which outline the common competenc es to Education studies and Teacher Education 
programmes, expected at the end of a first a nd second cycle degree (the latter is by now the 
generally expected degree level one for European teachers).  
88 The following excerpts present a synthesis of relevant compet ence descriptors in each case, 
avoiding repetitions. 
 TUNING Educational Structures in Europe II 
Education Sciences area - Specific Competences: Teacher Education 
89 The descriptors in italics are linked to key generic competences (transversal to other subject areas 
beyond Teacher Education) 
• Commitment to learners’ progress and achievement 
• Competence in a number of teaching/learning strategies and assessment and understanding of 
their theoretical bases 
• Competence in counselling learners and parents 
• Knowledge of the subject to be taught 
• Ability to communicate effectively with groups and individuals  
• Ability to create an equal and fair climate conducive to learning for all learners, regardless of 
their socio-cultural-economic context 
• Ability to make use of e-learning and to integrate it into the learning environments 
• Ability to manage time effectively 
• Ability to reflect upon and evaluate one’s own performance 
• Awareness of the need for continuous professional development 
• Ability to assess the outcomes of learning and learners’ achievements 
• Competence in collaborative problem-solving of educational issues in a variety of contexts 
• Ability to respond to the diverse needs of learners 
• Ability to improve the teaching/learning environment 
• Ability to adjust the curriculum and practices to a specific educational context. 
 Common level cycle descriptors for Edu cation Sciences AND Teacher Education 
90 A note specifies that not all competences will be full y developed at the end of the first cycle studies 
and will continue to develop over the professional life continuum, both in formal, informal and non-
formal learning contexts.  
 First Cycle (Bachelor)  
91 The first cycle descriptors include the three are as of the Common European Principles for European 
Teacher Qualifications (European Commission, 2005). 
                                                                                                                                                              
degree level, in terms of ‘can-do’ statements. The ‘competence’ term is used in its broadest sense, allowing for 
gradation of abilities and skills.  

© European Commission 27
 Specific competences 
• work with information and knowledge of subject taught, educational issues and theoretical 
bases;  
• work with human beings, analysing complex situations about learning and development in 
context;  
• work with society on different levels, including the development of professional values and 
the ability to reflect on practices and contexts 
• ability to reflect on one’s own and others’ value systems, development and practices 
 Generic key competences 
• capacity to learn 
• autonomy 
• decision-making 
• appreciation of diversity and multiculturality 
• ethical commitment 
• critical and self-critical abilities 
• capacity to improve one’s own learning and performance, including study and research 
skills 
• ability to analyze, synthesize, evaluate, identify problems and work out solutions 
• firm knowledge of the profession in practice 
 Second Cycle (Master) 
 Specific competences 
• development of knowledge and understanding in chosen area of professional specialization 
• ability to use research appropriate to discipline to inform practices 
• ability to reflect on values appropriate to educational activities 
 Generic key competences 
• research skills 
• leadership skills 
• ability to reflect on and evaluate one’s own performance 
• development of advanced cognitive skills associated with knowledge development and 
creation 
C.  Synthesis of recurrent, shared definitions of teacher competences/ 
capacities in recent educational studies (review by Williamson & 
McDiarmid, 2008) 
92 The following list synthesizes key elements of a r ecent review of relevant conceptualizations of 
teacher competences in recent international literature, as cited above, considering input from several 
research strands and studies.  

© European Commission 28
 Knowledge  
• subject matter knowledge 
• pedagogical subject knowledge27 
• pedagogical knowledge 
• curricular knowledge 
• educational sciences foundations (intercultural, historical, philosophical, psychological, 
sociological knowledge) 
• contextual, institutional, organizational aspects of educational policies 
• issues of inclusion and diversity 
• new technologies 
• developmental psychology 
• group processes and dynamics, learning theories, motivational issues 
• evaluation and assessment processes and methods.  
 Craft skills 
• planning, managing and coordinating teaching 
• using teaching materials and technologies 
• managing students and groups 
• monitoring and assessing learning 
• collaborating with colleagues, parents and social services 
• negotiating skills 
• collaborative, reflective, interpersonal skills for learning in professional communities 
• ability to adapt to multi-level dynamics with cross-influences (from government policies to 
student, classroom and school dynamics) 
• ability to draw conclusions and decisions on the basis of interpretations of evidence and data, 
for teaching and learning enhancement. 
 Values 
• epistemological awareness (i.e. about relevant issues of the features and historical development 
of the subject area and its status, as related to other subject areas) 
• dispositions to change 
• commitment to promoting the learning of all students 
• dispositions to promote students’ democratic attitudes and practices, as future European citizens 
• dispositions to flexibility and ongoing learning 
• dispositions to examining, discussing, questioning one’s own practices. 
                                                 
27  Shulman’s definition of pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) includes knowledge concerning curricular 
materials, recurrent difficulties of su bject-specific learning, learning contexts and objectives (Shulman, 1986, 
1987). 