Students
Faculty & Staff
Families
Visitors
Alumni
Academics
Research
Health Care
Campus Life
Athletics
Admission
About
News
Events
Search Stanford:
Other ways to search: Map Profiles
Main Content
Cookie Policy
Stanford University provides the following information relating to your privacy when using websites in the Stanford.EDU domain. This privacy policy covers all Stanford.EDU websites unless otherwise indicated on a specific website.
Online Privacy Notice
Cookie Policy
This Cookie Policy applies to the cookies we use when you visit Stanford University’s main website (www.stanford.edu) and other websites that we own or control and link or refer to this Cookie Policy (together, the “Sites”).
This cookie policy provides you with more information about cookies, what types of cookies we use and how we use them. Our Sites use cookies with the intention of providing you with a user experience that best suits your needs, while concurrently allowing us to improve the design and functionality of our Sites. Cookies can be adjusted or disabled, and this policy provides you with instructions to do so.
Cookies
A cookie is a file designed to contain a small amount of user and website information stored on a user’s computer. The file interacts with the user and the website to provide a webpage tailored to the user through its awareness of information held within the file. Cookies also have the ability to carry all or parts of the information stored within the file to other websites that the user may visit or to third parties.
Types of Cookies
A third-party cookie is placed by a domain other than that of the website the user is visiting.
A session cookie is temporary, linking the actions of a user during any given browser session. When the browser is closed, the cookie is deleted.
A permanent cookie, also known as a persistent cookie, is stored for a specific period of time and activates each time the user visits the website that created the cookie.
Our Use of Cookies
We use third-party, session and persistent cookies and similar technology to collect aggregate (non-personal) information about Sites usage by all of our visitors and to help us remember you and your preferences when you revisit the Sites. These cookies may stay on your browser into the future until they expire or you delete them. We also use technology to remember you the next time you log in. Some of these cookies are erased when you close your browser window and some persist for a period of time. Further general information about cookies and how they work is available at www.allaboutcookies.org .
We may allow selected third parties to place cookies through the Sites to provide us with better insights into the use of the Sites or user demographics or to provide relevant advertising to you. These third parties may collect information about a user’s online activities over time and across different websites when he or she uses our Sites.
The cookies used on our Sites may include, but are not limited to, the following:
Some of these cookies may collect the request made by your browser to the server hosting the website which includes the IP address, the date and time of connection and the page you ask for. We use this information to ensure the security of our Sites.
Some of these cookies help make the Sites work and deliver services that the website visitor expects, like navigating around web pages or accessing secure areas of the website. Without these cookies, the Sites cannot function properly.
We use cookies like NID and SID to help customize ads on Google websites and other online properties, like Google Search. Some uses include remembering your most recent searches, your previous interactions with an advertiser’s ads or search results, and your visits to an advertiser’s website. This helps us to show you customized ads.
Adjusting Cookie Settings
You can change your cookie settings by reviewing your internet browser’s cookie options. The links below to popular browsers may help you understand your cookie options better. Typically, such information can be found under the browser’s ‘Help’, ‘Preferences’ or ‘Options’ menus.
Cookie settings in Chrome
Cookie settings in Firefox
Cookie settings in Internet Explorer
Cookie settings in Safari – iOS
Cookie settings in Safari – macOS
Interest-Based Advertisements
Some of our Sites engage in online interest-based advertising to enhance your experience and show you advertisements that might interest you. Like many organizations, we and our advertising partners display tailored interest-based advertising using information you make available to us when you interact with our Sites. Interest-based ads, also sometimes referred to as personalized or targeted ads, are displayed to you based on information from activities such as searching on our Sites or visiting websites that contain our content or ads. We do this using a variety of digital marketing networks and ad exchanges, and we use a range of advertising technologies like web beacons, pixels, ad tags, cookies, and mobile identifiers.
To learn more about interest-based ads or to opt out of receiving third-party interest-based ads, please visit http://optout.aboutads.info or www.youronlinechoices.eu . Please note that if you opt out of interest-based advertising, you will still see advertisements – they will just not be tailored to your interests. Also, note that deleting browser cookies can remove the cookie preferences you have made, so you may need to opt out again in the future.
Blocking Cookies
Should you choose to decline or block cookies by adjusting your browser settings, including cookies essential to the Sites. Please note that all or parts of our Sites may not be functional or accessible to you. Our Sites will issue cookies as soon you visit the Sites, unless your browser cookie settings are adjusted to prevent such an occurrence. Please review the information provided in this cookie policy on adjusting cookie settings for the browser of your choice.
Google Analytics
We use Google Analytics to help operate our Sites more efficiently, to gather demographic information, and to monitor the level of activity of our Sites. For information on how Google uses data from sites that share information with Google, see https://www.google.com/policies/privacy/partners/ (or other relevant URL that Google may provide from time to time). You can prevent the use of Google Analytics relating to your use of our Sites by downloading and installing the browser plugin available at this link: https://tools.google.com/dlpage/gaoptout?hl=en .
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
YouTube
iTunes U
Schools
Business
Education
Engineering
Humanities & Sciences
Law
Medicine
Sustainability
Academics
Undergraduate Majors
Graduate Programs
Research
Research Centers A - to Z
Libraries
Health Care
Stanford Health Care
Stanford Children's Health
Online Learning
Stanford Online
About Stanford
Facts
History
Accreditation
Admission
Undergraduate
Graduate
Financial Aid
Resources
Campus Map
Community Engagement
Directory
Stanford Profiles
Applying
Visiting
Giving
Careers
Faculty Positions
Contact
Stanford Home
Maps & Directions
Search Stanford
Emergency Info
Terms of Use
Privacy
Copyright
Trademarks
Non-Discrimination
Accessibility
© Copyright Stanford University . Stanford , California 94305 .