Students
Faculty & Staff
Families
Visitors
Alumni
Academics
Research
Health Care
Campus Life
Athletics
Admission
About
News
Events
Search Stanford:
Other ways to search: Map Profiles
Main Content
Research
From Nobel Prize winners to undergraduates, all members of the Stanford community are engaged in the creation of knowledge and in developing solutions for a better future.
Building Tomorrow
Stanford research has a distinctive track record of developing life-changing treatments for disease, inventing revolutionary technologies, and unlocking new ways of understanding the world around us.
Developing generative AI for the genome
Reimagining the future of food
Paving the way for treatment of neurodegenerative diseases
Driving Growth
Stanford-Grown Ventures
Many of the world’s most innovative and influential companies got their start here. Companies founded by Stanford alumni boost the U.S. economy, drive job growth, and help maintain national security and competitiveness. These are just some of them:
World-Changing Discoveries
Stanford’s robust and pioneering research ecosystem is supported by a long-standing partnership between universities and the federal government. Thousands of projects across campus and around the world drive discoveries in areas vital to our world, our health, and our intellectual life.
Invented at Stanford:
Antibody therapies that made cancer and autoimmune disease treatments possible
Artificial organ prototypes and advancements in artificial hearts and other organ-support technologies
Recombinant DNA technology that laid the foundation for the biotech industry
Google’s page-rank algorithm that revolutionized searching the web
Internet protocols (TCP/IP) that formed the backbone of the modern internet
Microwave technology that made military radar detection, commercial air navigation, and satellite communications possible
Neural networks and reinforcement learning, which laid the groundwork for the AI revolution
An Infrastructure for Innovation
Vice Provost and Dean of Research
The Office of the Vice Provost and Dean of Research (VPDoR) advances Stanford’s research ecosystem, which includes independent labs, centers, and institutes to engage faculty and students across the university.
VPDoR
Stanford Universities Libraries
Stanford is home to 21 libraries, each with a world-class collection of books, journals, films, maps, and databases.
Stanford Universities Libraries
Office of Technology Licensing
The Office of Technology Licensing (OTL) manages intellectual property licensing and brings innovations that grow from Stanford research to the marketplace.
OTL
Subscribe to Stanford Report to have the latest research and insights delivered to your inbox.
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
LinkedIn
YouTube
iTunes U
Schools
Business
Education
Engineering
Humanities & Sciences
Law
Medicine
Sustainability
Academics
Undergraduate Majors
Graduate Programs
Research
Research Centers A - to Z
Libraries
Health Care
Stanford Health Care
Stanford Children's Health
Online Learning
Stanford Online
About Stanford
Facts
History
Accreditation
Admission
Undergraduate
Graduate
Financial Aid
Resources
Campus Map
Community Engagement
Directory
Stanford Profiles
Applying
Visiting
Giving
Careers
Faculty Positions
Contact
Stanford Home
Maps & Directions
Search Stanford
Emergency Info
Terms of Use
Privacy
Copyright
Trademarks
Non-Discrimination
Accessibility
© Copyright Stanford University . Stanford , California 94305 .