ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Call for applications for US Visiting Faculty 2026-2027
International , International Partnerships , Research
Committed to supporting research at the highest level through their partnership, Université Paris Cité and Sciences Po are calling for outstanding applications for visiting faculty from the United States. Apply before January 30, 2026.
Candidates selected under a principle of shared interest for both institutions will be hosted in one of the Sciences Po or Université Paris Cité research units . Applications are open for one-semester stays planned in the 2026 Fall Semester and the 2027 Spring Semester.
The visiting programme is open to all disciplines, but particular attention will be paid to applications related to the following themes: Gender, Climate and climate governance, Health and social sciences, International relations and security studies, Education policies, Discriminations, AI and data science.
Why you should apply
This unique partnership between two leading French universities offers visiting faculty the opportunity to exchange and collaborate with colleagues from the other institution.
Université Paris Cité
Université Paris Cité is a research-intensive, multidisciplinary university at the heart of an international network, fostering knowledge and innovation. Driven by its tagline Planetary Health, Université Paris Cité is a space that fosters knowledge building, freedom to innovate and explore the limits of our understanding in order to meet the challenges of tomorrow’s society. UPCité contributes to nearly 10% of all French scientific publications, counts for 8% of the country’s PhDs and runs top-tier research across all disciplines.
Sciences Po
Sciences Po is an international research university, both selective and open to the world, ranking among the finest institutions in the fields of humanities and social sciences. Sciences Po stands out for combining approaches and confronting different worldviews. This tradition of diversity and multidisciplinary approach makes Sciences Po a reputed player in academic research through its scientific production, an internationally recognized teaching university and an active participant in public debate.
Conditions
Gross monthly stipend of 5,000 euros
Access to office space, library, university facilities, research activity and events programme at either Sciences Po or Université Paris Cité
Visiting faculty are expected to contribute actively to the research community they will join, and to deliver at least one academic lecture or seminar presentation in the other institution
Application
Full details on eligibility requirements and application materials can be found in the call for applications .
Schedule
Deadline for applications: January 30, 2026
Important notice : Applicants should contact the relevant Research Centre at least one month prior the deadline for applications to secure a letter of invitation in due time
Decisions will be communicated in early April to applicants
Contact for Université Paris Cité : mathieu.sene@u-paris.fr
Applications and questions should be submitted by email to mathilde.croquet@sciencespo.fr
Call for Applications
À lire aussi
No relationship between Université Paris Cité and the private company operating under the name City University of Paris
Université Paris Cité discovered that a private higher education establishment initially called Intelligest has recently changed its company name for ‘City University of Paris’. Université Paris Cité points out that it has no links whatsoever (association,...
Signing of a New Agreement with the University of Chicago
On April 28, 2025, Université Paris Cité took a new step in its cooperation with the University of Chicago. Antoine Kouchner, Vice President for International Relations, traveled to Chicago to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) alongside Katherine Baicker,...
Circle U. Communities of Practice: Exchange and Innovate!
The European university alliance Circle U. is calling for the creation of Communities of Practice (CoPs). The aim is to bring together administrative, teaching, and research staff with shared interests to exchange best practices. Have a topic you'd like to explore...
Université Paris Cité Ranks 5th in the World for Innovation
Université Paris Cité (UPCité) is ranked 5th in the world in Clarivate's top 50 universities for innovation, unveiled today. It is also the leading European university. This distinction testifies to the excellence of its research and its ability to nurture technology...
Recent Posts
[Cardiovascular Sciences] “Open UE”: looking back on an interdisciplinary adventure!
Scientific event: the Neuroscience Graduate School highlights its young researchers
[Bottom-up calls for projects – Circle U.] Internationalise your courses and missions at UPCité!
Université Paris Cité on the path to internationalising its programmes
Call for applications for US Visiting Faculty 2026-2027
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok

--- OCR de imagen: SiegeUP_1920-1-1080x675_3fd61e8d.jpeg ---
20) 0 oom -
Fila

ee Ae ee oe eS