ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Call for projects 2025 UPCité – University of Toronto
International Partnerships
The call for projects between Université Paris Cité (UPCité) and our privileged partner University of Toronto (U of T), has been launched this Tuesday, April 1 until June 2, 2025.
The objectives
Université Paris Cité and the University of Toronto are offering funding for their researchers to support research in all disciplines and foster international collaboration. This call aims to catalyze long-term collaboration.
Target audiences
Each project proposal must include a Principal Investigator (PI) from both Université Paris Cité and the University of Toronto.
Terms and conditions of eligibility
Full details of the terms and conditions of eligibility are given in the call for applications .
How to apply?
This is a joint call, but only one application needs to be submitted online via the Move on portal .
Timeline
The closing date for the call and applications is June 2, 2025.
Results: July 2025
For any questions relating to this call for projects :
University of Toronto : elina.tulla@utoronto.ca
Université Paris Cité: internationalisation.iro@u-paris.fr
The partnership of UPCité – U of T
À lire aussi
No relationship between Université Paris Cité and the private company operating under the name City University of Paris
Université Paris Cité discovered that a private higher education establishment initially called Intelligest has recently changed its company name for ‘City University of Paris’. Université Paris Cité points out that it has no links whatsoever (association,...
Signing of a New Agreement with the University of Chicago
On April 28, 2025, Université Paris Cité took a new step in its cooperation with the University of Chicago. Antoine Kouchner, Vice President for International Relations, traveled to Chicago to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) alongside Katherine Baicker,...
Circle U. Communities of Practice: Exchange and Innovate!
The European university alliance Circle U. is calling for the creation of Communities of Practice (CoPs). The aim is to bring together administrative, teaching, and research staff with shared interests to exchange best practices. Have a topic you'd like to explore...
Université Paris Cité Ranks 5th in the World for Innovation
Université Paris Cité (UPCité) is ranked 5th in the world in Clarivate's top 50 universities for innovation, unveiled today. It is also the leading European university. This distinction testifies to the excellence of its research and its ability to nurture technology...
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok