ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Circle U. European University Alliance
Université Paris Cité is a member of the Circle U. European alliance. Circle U. brings together 9 European universities with the same aim: to contribute to the advent of more sustainable, more democratic and healthier societies. The alliance develops numerous opportunities to enable its 470,000 students and 64,000 staff and academics to cooperate across disciplines, sectors and national borders.  As part of its commitment to engaging in dialogue with society, Circle U. also brings together a number of associate partners representing local authorities, businesses and civil society organisations. Their aim? To work together to create activities around the alliance’s key themes in response to the major challenges facing our society.
Circle U. partner universities: Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin in Germany, King’s College London in the United Kingdom, Université catholique de Louvain in Belgium, University of Belgrade in Serbia, University of Oslo in Norway, Aarhus University in Denmark, University of Pisa in Italy, University of Vienna in Austria, Université Paris Cité in France.
Presentation
Themes
Open campus
Application procedure
Summer schools
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok

--- OCR de imagen: OPEN-CAMPUS-CIRCLE-U_9286a390.jpeg ---
€ Circle v.

Opportunities for students

Welcome to the Open Campus!

‘The Open Campus is a virtual university campus where students can
find all joint offers developed by our nine partner universities, You will
find different formats and subjects, varying from hackatons to talks to
‘nine and physical courses and summer schools ~ and many things in-
between, Be sure to check out what you can apply for now, what's
‘coming up and what is available online.

Want to know what's happening? Follow us on Instagram and subscribe
$o.0ur newsletter!