ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Culture at Université Paris Cité
Cultural activities represent key facets of campus and student life. Historical monuments and prominent museums surround Université Paris Cité. Our campuses are fully immersed into the cultural heritage of Paris and its surrounding areas bringing you a wide variety of landmarks to visit and discover during your academic journey.
Bringing Together the Community with Arts and Culture
The cultural department at Université Paris Cité offers outings to the theatre, cinema, dance shows, opera, concerts, contempory art exhibitions and much more at low prices for the student community. A series of programmes are developed to support student needs and are available each year. Many events (festivals, cultural workshops, shows, etc.) are organised directly on our campuses and are also easily accessible on-line.
International students can participate in our annual event, ‘Welcome Week’, which typically takes place in October at the start of the fall semester. It is an opportunity for students to discover and engage in arts and culture in different ways. All sorts of activities such as conferences, events and games are organised in the spirit of embracing the importance of international, European and cultural diversity.
Don’t miss out on our cultural activities by registering here to receive more information by email.
Contacts
Pôle Culture
Campus Grands Moulins
5 rue Thomas Mann 75013 Paris
Phone: 01 57 27 59 37 / 01 57 27 64 36
Email: culture@u-paris.fr
Visit us on social media
Facebook: @culture.univparis Instagram : culture.univparis
Read more
Université Paris Cité welcomed new international staff members
On November 14th, Université Paris Cité welcomed nearly 50 new international staff members – visiting lecturers, doctoral and post-doctoral students, researchers, and contractual lecturer-researchers of foreign nationality – who have arrived since the beginning of...
The Buddy System continues to promote intercultural exchanges at Université Paris Cité
On November 5, 2025, a sharing event brought together participants of Université Paris Cité’s Buddy System. This was the second interfaculty event of the year, aimed at connecting French and international students from the University.A Drink and Some Ping-Pong To...
[Student testimony] Why do I like studying at Université Paris Cité?
Hi ! I'm Roba Adel, a Master student in Arts and Humanities and a Circle U. student ambassador. Today I'm going to give you a few (very good) reasons to choose my university.Studying at Université Paris Cité is much more than just a university experience: it's living...
Erasmus Days: Discover the 2025 Edition Programme!
From 13 to 17 October 2025, Université Paris Cité celebrates Erasmus Days! International mobility conferences, film debate, information stands… discover our full programme.[iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CKRvIR-uEyE?si=OZAUBQwEqWbXful_" width="560"...
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok