Contact
Presentation About Team
About
Team
Education Masters
Masters
Research Laboratories Doctoral schools
Laboratories
Doctoral schools
Actions and events
Graduate School Society and Health’s Applithon 2025 dedicated to mental health
Society & Health
Mental health has been designated a “ national cause ” in 2025 by the French government, a priority that resonates with Université Paris Cité’s commitment to global health. The Graduate School Society and Health organized its third Applithon to reflect on the design of innovative applications dedicated to mental health.
Graduate School Society and Health masters students, with the teaching team.
Students from the various Masters courses of the Graduate School Society and Health gathered during a day of workshops in multidisciplinary groups to develop an innovative solution to mental health issues.
Elderly people, victims of domestic violence, isolated minors, people experiencing post-partum depression… each group of students identified and chose a target audience concerned by mental health problems.
A teaching team to support them
To support them in carrying out their project, the students were supported by Pauline Chauvin and Bernard Andrieu, co-directors of the Graduate School ; Antoine Marsaudon, director of the Master in Health Economics, and Lydia Morlet, director of the Master in Health Law, Comparative Health Law specialization.
Students also had the chance to hear from Charley Moinet, head of communications for the Mental’o research project run by Inserm. This app asks 11-24 year-olds about their mental well-being, and uses the results to develop relevant prevention campaigns.
Congratulations to the winners
At the end of this day of reflection, the jury decided to award 1st prize to two groups:
– The AURA group, with Jordan Piade (Master in Health Economics), Regina Choe (Master in Studies and Evaluations in the Health and Social Sectors), Yoan Forestier (Master in Health Law, Health Activities and Responsibilities), Sarah Eugene-Defontaine (Master in Health Law, Health Products Industry Law) and Théa Try (Master in Health Law, Health, Labor and Social Protection) for their proposal for an application to help women victims of violence.
– The D-Chargemental group, with Shao-Hsi Liu (Master’s degree in History and Philosophy of Science), Ilann Harling (Master’s degree in Studies and Evaluations in the Health and Social Sectors), Roba Benkelloua (Master’s degree in Health Law, Health Activities and Responsibilities), Sibille Dusanter (Master droit de la santé, Droit des industries des produits de santé), Rita Merheb (Master Économie de la santé) proposing an application designed for both members of a couple to prevent depression after the birth of a child.
À lire aussi
[International PhD] The University of Toronto and UPCité launch a new joint call for proposals
Call for applications
The University of Toronto and the Université Paris Cité and are launching a joint call for proposals in order to further develop their research collaboration and doctoral program strength.
[Call for applications] Support for the implementation of scientific and training projects for doctoral students
Call for applications , Society & Health
The Graduate School would like to help young researchers at the Université Paris Cité to implement their scientific and training projects. The aim of this call for applications is to provide financial support for projects and actions that will help structure their...
[Call for Applications SMARTS-UP] Scholarship 2024-2025
Society & Health
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin

--- OCR de imagen: logo-Society_Health_be9c51e1.jpeg ---
’ Society & Health
W & GRADUATE SCHOOL

Sire pro

aha

--- OCR de imagen: Sans-titre-1920-x-1080-px1-2_0734b04c.jpeg ---
MUTTTT 7S, ; ~
¥ 4

--- OCR de imagen: Sans-titre-1920-x-1080-px12-2_97a109d0.jpeg ---
(CRIES Sao sie | Te ila i
oa am |_jeaeine SSEMG0GEIE Cnet ide RR ee ieeae MR ee bdedei eee

] I ; | ine
si fe ii Lee ii itt tt mf (SER Get ee eee Ati] (ores eesneae 8 I}

iG ee ; LE 5 *)

--- OCR de imagen: SmartUP_1920-980x551_38842d0f.jpeg ---
nk Ts

SITE P

%

CiTE®

7) a

z
UW.
®. ae

--- OCR de imagen: SMARTS-UP_logo_f88a235f.png ---
RT
we Se

ahinie
>
CITE® &

>

Nd
SITE P pe

--- OCR de imagen: Sans-titre-1920-x-1080-px6-2_bbdaeb9d.jpeg ---
ain

el pan

i