ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
International Study Characterises for the First Time a New Type of Kidney Transplant Rejection
Press , Research
In cases of kidney failure, transplantation is the treatment of choice. However, the risk of rejection remains high. A better understanding of the immune response to kidney transplant rejection – and in particular the phenomenon of microvascular inflammation – could contribute to improved diagnostic and therapeutic management of patients. A study conducted by researchers from Inserm, AP-HP and Université Paris Cité, [1] , in collaboration with international partners, has characterized for the first time new forms of kidney transplant rejection and their impact on long-term kidney graft survival. The results were published on October 24 in the New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM ).
© Université Paris Cité
Kidney transplantation is the treatment of choice for patients with end-stage renal disease, but its long-term success is compromised by rejection, the main cause of graft loss. Microvascular inflammation, a key indicator of the immune response during renal transplant rejection, represents a major challenge for clinicians. This as yet poorly characterized phenotype can manifest itself in a variety of clinical contexts, making the diagnostic and therapeutic management of patients particularly complex.
In a vast international study coordinated by Alexandre Loupy [1] , professor at Paris Cité University, nephrologist in the adult nephrology-renal transplantation department at Necker-Enfants malades Hospital (AP-HP) and director of the Paris Institute for Transplantation and Organ Regeneration – PITOR at Paris Cité University), including 16,000 biopsies taken from 7,000 kidney transplant patients in 30 reference centers in 7 countries across Europe and North America, the researchers characterized for the first time new forms of kidney transplant rejection and their impact on long-term kidney graft survival.
The unique cohort formed as part of this research reflects the diversity of clinical practice across several countries, reinforcing the scope of the findings and their potential to influence transplant care worldwide. The integration of these new phenotypes in the diagnosis of rejection paves the way for standardization of future clinical trials, aimed at elucidating the underlying immunological processes and defining personalized therapeutic strategies.
“This research represents a major advance in kidney transplant medicine, for optimized patient management. In addition, these results open up significant avenues to better elucidate the mechanisms of organ rejection, with spin-offs in other fields such as cardiac, liver, lung and composite tissue transplantation, as well as xenotransplantation, where our team recently demonstrated similar rejection mechanisms involving the microcirculation,” says Professor Alexandre Loupy.
This study also highlights the need for large-scale projects to foster innovation in the management and follow-up of transplant patients, at a time when improving graft survival is essential to meet the global challenge of organ shortage.
[1] This project was led by a consortium of researchers from the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm), AP-HP and Université Paris Cité, under the direction of Professor Alexandre Loupy of the Institut de Transplantation et de Régénération d’Organes de Paris (PITOR). This work was made possible thanks to support from the ANR (KTD-Innov study, ANR-17-RHUS-0010) as well as the Horizon Europe 2020 (EU-TRAIN study, 754995) and ERC Consolidator Grant (AI-Care, 101126272) programmes.
[2] NCT06496269
Source
Microvascular Inflammation of Kidney Allografts and Clinical Outcomes
Marta Sablik * , Aurélie Sannier * , Marc Raynaud # , Valentin Goutaudier # , Gillian Divard, Brad C. Astor, Patricia Weng, Jodi Smith, Rouba Garro, Bradley A. Warady, Rima S. Zahr, Katherine Twombley, Vikas R. Dharnidharka, Raja S. Dandamudi, Marc Fila, Edmund Huang, Anne-Laure Sellier-Leclerc, Burkhard Tönshoff, Marion Rabant, Jérôme Verine, Arnaud del Bello, Thierry Berney, Olivia Boyer, Rusan Ali Catar, Richard Danger, Magali Giral, Daniel Yoo, François Girardin, Alaa Alsadi, Pierre-Antoine Gourraud, Emmanuel Morelon, Moglie Le Quintrec, Mélanie Try, Jean Villard, Weixiong Zhong, Oriol Bestard, Klemens Budde, Bertrand Chauveau, Lionel Couzi, Sophie Brouard, Julien Hogan, Christophe Legendre, Dany Anglicheau, Olivier Aubert, Nassim Kamar, Carmen Lefaucheur, Alexandre Loupy
New England Journal of Medicine, 24 octobre 2024
Read more
[Cardiovascular Sciences] “Open UE”: looking back on an interdisciplinary adventure!
The “open UE”, launched by the Graduate School Cardiovascular Sciences, brought together researchers, clinicians, and experts from diverse fields for a week to explore major issues in biomedical and translational research. Open to all students across the 29 Graduate Schools of Université Paris Cité, it offered a unique space for learning and interdisciplinary exchange.
Scientific event: the Neuroscience Graduate School highlights its young researchers
The Neuroscience Graduate School held the third edition of its scientific event, giving students from across the Graduate School the opportunity to present their research work. This now-established meeting has become a key moment for bringing together Master’s...
Call for applications for US Visiting Faculty 2026-2027
Committed to supporting research at the highest level through their partnership, Université Paris Cité and Sciences Po are calling for outstanding applications for visiting faculty from the United States. Apply before January 30, 2026.Candidates selected under a...
Université Paris Cité welcomed new international staff members
On November 14th, Université Paris Cité welcomed nearly 50 new international staff members – visiting lecturers, doctoral and post-doctoral students, researchers, and contractual lecturer-researchers of foreign nationality – who have arrived since the beginning of...
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok