ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Plastics and Health: Université Paris Cité makes an International Commitment
Research
Université Paris Cité continues to pursue its commitment to promoting science with and for society, notably through the participation of its researchers in public debates on major environmental and health issues. At a recent hearing before the Parliamentary Office for the Evaluation of Scientific and Technological Choices (OPECST), our researchers shared their expertise on the effects of plastics on human health, within the framework of international negotiations aimed at limiting plastic pollution.
Université Paris Cité is reaffirming its commitment to making science accessible and useful to society by getting involved in wide-ranging scientific discussions on the impact of plastics on human health. Recently, several researchers were invited to take part in a hearing organised by the Parliamentary Office for the Evaluation of Scientific and Technological Choices (OPECST). This hearing included in the international discussions on plastic pollution, is part of a crucial process that should lead to the signing of a United Nations treaty in 2025.
The hearing, which brought together experts from a broad array of backgrounds, aimed to shed light on the scientific issues surrounding plastics and provide input for the negotiations that have been ongoing since 2022. The final round of discussions will take place in December 2024 in South Korea.
Researchers from Université Paris Cité, including Sonja Boland, a research engineer at the Functional and Adaptive Biology unit (BFA), presented recent advances on the effects of inhaled plastics on human health. She also shared the results of work implemented by her team, contributing to the global effort to understand the health risks associated with these materials. Such data is of crucial importance at a time when plastics are ever-present in our daily lives, and their impact on human health remains a growing concern.
Xavier Coumoul and Robert Barouki, professors of toxicology and biochemistry and directors of the T3S laboratory unit (Inserm/Université Paris Cité) were also present alongside researchers from Inrae, ANSES and international experts, notably to highlight the potential impact of plastic additives. This diversity of expertise underlines the importance of scientific collaboration in tackling contemporary environmental challenges, and demonstrates the central role played by Université Paris Cité in these global discussions.
The active involvement of Université Paris Cité in these negotiations demonstrates its commitment to promoting science that interacts with society, responds to current health and environmental challenges as well as contributes to international decision-making. In doing so, the university is confirming its pioneering role in the production of scientific knowledge for the common good.
The video of this public hearing is available on the Senate website, enabling a wide audience to follow the discussions and learn about the contributions of the researchers involved in this initiative. Watch here
Read more
[Cardiovascular Sciences] “Open UE”: looking back on an interdisciplinary adventure!
The “open UE”, launched by the Graduate School Cardiovascular Sciences, brought together researchers, clinicians, and experts from diverse fields for a week to explore major issues in biomedical and translational research. Open to all students across the 29 Graduate Schools of Université Paris Cité, it offered a unique space for learning and interdisciplinary exchange.
Scientific event: the Neuroscience Graduate School highlights its young researchers
The Neuroscience Graduate School held the third edition of its scientific event, giving students from across the Graduate School the opportunity to present their research work. This now-established meeting has become a key moment for bringing together Master’s...
Call for applications for US Visiting Faculty 2026-2027
Committed to supporting research at the highest level through their partnership, Université Paris Cité and Sciences Po are calling for outstanding applications for visiting faculty from the United States. Apply before January 30, 2026.Candidates selected under a...
[SMARTS-UP Graduate Schools call for applications] International scholarships for Master’s students
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok