ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Research and Technical Platforms
A research-intensive university, certified Initiative d’excellence (Idex), Université Paris Cité contributes to the scientific strengths of France and Europe. By combining outstanding expertise in health sciences, fundamental sciences, applied science, and social sciences, Université Paris Cité develops research internationally, ranking first among French universities in terms of citations per article.
Cutting-edge Research Platforms
Université Paris Cité provides the academic, scientific and industrial sectors with 211 research platforms and technical facilities, equipped with state-of-the-art equipment and led by professionals recognized for their knowledge and their efficiency.
Key Figures
Faculty of Health Platforms
Faculty of Sciences/Institut de physique du globe de Paris (IPGP) Platforms
Inter-faculties Platforms
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences Platforms
Find out more (content in French)
Read more
[Cardiovascular Sciences] “Open UE”: looking back on an interdisciplinary adventure!
The “open UE”, launched by the Graduate School Cardiovascular Sciences, brought together researchers, clinicians, and experts from diverse fields for a week to explore major issues in biomedical and translational research. Open to all students across the 29 Graduate Schools of Université Paris Cité, it offered a unique space for learning and interdisciplinary exchange.
Scientific event: the Neuroscience Graduate School highlights its young researchers
The Neuroscience Graduate School held the third edition of its scientific event, giving students from across the Graduate School the opportunity to present their research work. This now-established meeting has become a key moment for bringing together Master’s...
[Bottom-up calls for projects – Circle U.] Internationalise your courses and missions at UPCité!
Université Paris Cité wishes to support the investment of its administrative staff and academics in Circle U.the European alliance. How? By funding up to 5,000€ projects such as organising international conferences, staff weeks, translating documents to propose...
Université Paris Cité on the path to internationalising its programmes
L'Université Paris Cité is committed to internationalising part of its study programmes and supporting academic staff who wish to be part of this initiative. In order to provide them with the best support possible in gradually transforming their course modules, it has...
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok