ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Scholarships
Université Paris Cité aims to promote access for international students who wish to undertake their academic studies at the master’s level and for those pursuing  research projects at the doctoral level. We offer several types of scholarship programmes. The criteria and eligibility requirements for each programme may be different depending on your situation.
Eiffel
The Eiffel excellence programme managed by France’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Development, enables top international students to benefit from financial support, allowing them to enrol in Master degree and PhD programmes.
SMARTS-UP
The SMARTS-UP programme, financed by the SFRI call (Structuring training through research in initiatives of excellence) at Université of Paris, aims to promote the internationalization of Master’s programmes and facilitate the admission of the best international students. Within this framework, it is intended to finance incoming mobility grants for 2025-2026 to enable the University Research Schools (EUR) to welcome international students in the various Masters programmes.
Contacts
International Relations Head Office
Bâtiment des Grands Moulins – Aile A – 2e étage 5 rue Thomas Mann Paris 13e
aides.mobilité.drive@u-paris.fr
Find out more on scholarships on the French Government’s website
Read more
Université Paris Cité on the path to internationalising its programmes
Circle U , Education , Faculty of Health , Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences , Faculty of Sciences
L'Université Paris Cité is committed to internationalising part of its study programmes and supporting academic staff who wish to be part of this initiative. In order to provide them with the best support possible in gradually transforming their course modules, it has...
Call for applications for US Visiting Faculty 2026-2027
International , International Partnerships , Research
Committed to supporting research at the highest level through their partnership, Université Paris Cité and Sciences Po are calling for outstanding applications for visiting faculty from the United States. Apply before January 30, 2026.Candidates selected under a...
[SMARTS-UP Graduate Schools call for applications] International scholarships for Master’s students
Graduate Schools , International , Mobility
Highlights from the 2025 SMARTS-UP Mobility Grant Awardees’ Welcome Event
Graduate Schools , International
The SMARTS-UP project, which led to the creation of the 28 Graduate Schools at Université Paris Cité, plays a key role in the internationalization of research-based education. Each year, it supports top students from around the world through the awarding of mobility...
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok