ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Scientific publications
Université Paris Cité places great importance on promoting its scientific productions (articles, publishing of journals and edited volumes, conference organisation …) and disseminating them to the international scientific community. Thanks to Open Science , Open Access and Open Data movements the challenge is to make these publications more widely accessible to professionals, the public and the media. For this reason, the action plan for Université Paris Cité’ application for the HR Excellence in Research label sets out the terms and conditions for implementing open science.
Open Access is an international movement born in the early 2000s, which promotes the immediate, free and permanent availability of research publications (by researchers and educators) across the Internet since the draft law for a digital Republic, open access has been the subject of concerted policy at the national level, with the creation of the HAL archive
Open Data involves open and reusable digital data, whose access and utilisation are made free to users. The objectives are to guarantee greater transparency and reproducibility of research results, but also to foster innovation by allowing the reuse of data by others. Open Data is part of a trend that considers public information as a common good.
Open Science is not just a mixture of open access (access to publications) and open data : it is also about opening up research and promoting bibliodiversity and innovation. Université Paris Cité is a signatory to the Jussieu Call for Open Science.
Single signature of publications
HAL – Widely disseminate research publications
The Conversation – make your research known
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok

--- OCR de imagen: Bibliothque-ConvertImage_40a5792b.jpeg ---
pp

N| ; iq sl! tle
Mitiyg Nt ie i \:

eh (RULE
till |
‘ia Hi matt he

ie “TA