ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Student Associations
The dynamism of Université Paris Cité student associations offers students great opportunities to multiply enriching experiences and share a project or values. The University brings together over 120 student associations : culture, sport, citizenship… the choices are plentiful.
The Bichat Blouse Brothers Brass Band
© Université Paris Cité
Supporting student associations
The Student life Directorate of Université Paris Cité assists associations in their endeavors:
Supports student initiatives
Assistance in setting up projects that will be presented before the committee
Production or co-production of student events
The following content is in French
Funding for community projects
Part of the CVEC received by the university is dedicated each year to the financing of student association projects.
Any student association of the university or any student from Université Paris Cité who is a member of an outside association may file a request for funding for a project to be examined by the committee. Such aid may cover cultural, solidarity or humanitarian projects, sports, scientific, vocational guidance or student life activities.
Read more
How do I submit my file?
Download and complete the Student Association Projects Help form.
This form is to be sent as soon as possible, in Word format, by email to the Student association department. Following this e-mail, an appointment can be made to exchange information on your project before presenting it to the commission.
Put your file together by downloading the list of documents to be provided as well as the charter of engagement .
Submit your full paper file to the student association department by the 4 th of october, 2021 (deadline for review by the commission). The committee, originally is scheduled on the 21 th of october 2021 .
Where do I submit my file?
No records can be filed at this time. If you have any questions, the Student societies department remains available by email: corinne.songeons@u-paris.fr
MEVA
Located in room 069 E and 065E of the Halle aux Farines, The MEVA (House of Students and student associations) is a place of exchange for student associations of Université Paris Cité, dedicated to strengthening the community fabric .
Read more
Call for applications for US Visiting Faculty 2026-2027
International , International Partnerships , Research
Committed to supporting research at the highest level through their partnership, Université Paris Cité and Sciences Po are calling for outstanding applications for visiting faculty from the United States. Apply before January 30, 2026.Candidates selected under a...
[SMARTS-UP Graduate Schools call for applications] International scholarships for Master’s students
Graduate Schools , International , Mobility
Highlights from the 2025 SMARTS-UP Mobility Grant Awardees’ Welcome Event
Graduate Schools , International
The SMARTS-UP project, which led to the creation of the 28 Graduate Schools at Université Paris Cité, plays a key role in the internationalization of research-based education. Each year, it supports top students from around the world through the awarding of mobility...
Université Paris Cité welcomed new international staff members
International , International Partnerships , Research , Université Paris Cité
On November 14th, Université Paris Cité welcomed nearly 50 new international staff members – visiting lecturers, doctoral and post-doctoral students, researchers, and contractual lecturer-researchers of foreign nationality – who have arrived since the beginning of...
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok