ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Teacher-researchers and international PhD students
Université Paris Cité offers a legal framework, a welcoming system, and personalized support through the required steps.
Guest researcher
The international “Visiting Researchers” programme is intended to host international researchers for research missions . The guest is welcomed and integrated into the research teams of Université Paris Cité for a stay of two weeks to a month and a half . They receive an official invitation notification from the International Relations Head Office. Their stay is financed by a research grant from Université Paris Cité.
A researcher wishing to benefit from an invitation by Université Paris Cité g ets in touch with a research team in charge of the application at least one year before his or her stay . A selection campaign is organised annually. It is open for one month, in the spring , for a stay during the following calendar year.
Université Paris Cité laboratories
Open Calls : Applications for US Visiting Faculty, in partnership with SciencesPo
Open to outstanding candidates from all disciplines currently affiliated to American universities, to spend one semester either at Sciences Po or Université Paris Cité. Call for Applications Learn more
Visiting teacher-researcher
The international visiting teacher-researcher is welcomed and integrated into the teaching and research teams of Université Paris Cité for a short, medium or long stay (up to two years). The visitor finances the stay by a salary maintenance of their home institution, a grant from an outside organisation, etc. The visiting teacher-researcher receives a welcome letter and signs a reception agreement.
Several other facilities exist within the university offering many opportunities: • Ministerial or embassy programmes • Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions • Foundations or associations
Learn more
Visiting PhD student
Learn more
International dual PhD student
Learn more
International Relations Head Office
Campus des Grands Moulins Bâtiment des Grands Moulins – Aile A – 2e étage 5 rue Thomas Mann Paris 13e
Contact: welcomedesk.iro@u-paris.fr
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok