ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Everzom, Ermium Therapeutics, Carboneo are the latest PÉPITES startups to emerge from Université Paris Cité’s laboratories. They are the result of technology transfer and business development processes, since there are many partnerships already established by researchers with businesses. Why not your future project? What do we mean by this ? Where to start? Who can help me? Teacher-researchers, researchers, post-doctorates, and doctoral students, this page provides you with a way to commercialize your research work.
Réalisé d’après © réseau C.U.R.I.E.
Université Paris Cité aspires to being a key research player in France. It has a wealth and diversity of expertise, and talented researchers; unique strengths that will develop technology and shape our environment and health in the future for the benefit of everyone.
What is technology transfer and business development?
According to the National Board for the Assessment of Higher Education (CONAES), technology transfer and business development “makes research findings, knowledge and skills usable or commercializable”. Its aims to increase the value of research findings, to guarantee their impact from a social and economic perspective.
As indicated in the French Research Code (Article L111-1), the commercialization of research findings is part and parcel of the researcher’s remit – Research Code L111-1.
Technology transfer concerns the commercialization of public research findings in industry.
Technology transfer and business development is a virtuous circle leading from invention to innovation, a laboratory process to the market via a license or startup, and requires contacts with the social and economic world.
Practical guide to technology transfer, business development and innovation
Innovate with public research MOOC
Technology transfer and innovation at Université Paris Cité
Researchers are the focus of Université Paris Cité’s business development policy through technology transfer. Within this ecosystem, we have introduced with partners such as the CNRS and CNRS Innovation , the INSERM and INSERM Transfert , the APHP, the SATT Erganeo and incubators, among which Université Paris Cité Paris Biotech Santé, we are able to provide continuity of support for researchers up to the point of technology transfer.
Providing support is:
Signposting the path to technology transfer and business development
Building bridges with the social and economic world (teamwork, services, CIFRE, etc.)
Providing expertise (intellectual property, PACTE Law, creation of startups, etc.)
Financing systems to mature projects
Building the skills of the project initiators
Publicizing these projects and their teams
And especially, listening to and advising researchers.
Damien Marchal, Vice President, in charge of the technology transfer of research and industrial partnerships, answers the key questions in this column: Partnership-based research and technology transfer : a major challenge for Université Paris Cité. (the content is in french)
With the goal of accelerating the way research commercialization is structured, through partnerships and technology transfer within the establishment, Université Paris Cité hosted Bpifrance on 22 October 2020 during an all-digital event, the DeepTech Tour. You can see a replay if you follow this link .
Key Facts & Figures :
In 2019, in total :
Maturation projects supported by SATT Erganeo (105 in total since 2012)
Licenses (a total of 43 since 2014)
Startups created (au total 9 depuis 2015)
Examples of Startups from Research Laboratories at Université Paris Cité :
Everzoom  – Vidéo
Ermium Therapeutics
Argument Theory
Eyevensys
ExtraLab
Astraveus
Smart Immune
Get started with the IdEx Prematurity Call for Expressions of Interest
From the day it was founded, Université Paris Cité has supported the development of innovative projects with an entrepreneurial aspect, through the IdEx Prematurity AMI. This AMI (Appel à Manifestation d’Intérêt) aims to finance and showcase any innovative project emerging from the laboratories within the scope of the University Paris Cité. The goal is to develop the project’s proof of concept with a view to its future maturity and to increase the project initiators’ awareness of the challenges of the social an economic world.
In 2020, Université Paris Cité selected 20 innovative projects . The winning projects were picked out by a selection committee made up of representants of its ecosystem. The project leaders benefit from financial leverage and aid, enabling them to achieve their proof of concept. This arrangement helps finance projects up to €50 K (HR costs, services, consumables) for 12 months maximum.
More information to apply for the I dEx prematurity AMI. (Content is in French)
Contact us
Université Paris Cité’s Technology Transfer and Business Development Office, within the DRIVE, is dedicated to providing innovators and entrepreneurs with support engaging with faculties and partners. It works with researchers wishing to:
develop innovative teamwork projects or leveraging the University’s competences and/or
showcasing their expertise through technology transfer or the creation of businesses.
Working with the faculties, the team also follows up interactions with the SATT Erganeo and Université Paris Cité’s partners (AP-HP, CNRS, INSERM, etc.), particularly concerning issues such as protecting public research findings and monitoring technology transfer.
It will answer your questions and/or direct you to the appropriate representative within our ecosystem.
Contact: innovation.recherche@u-paris.fr
Read more
[Cardiovascular Sciences] “Open UE”: looking back on an interdisciplinary adventure!
Graduate Schools , Research
The “open UE”, launched by the Graduate School Cardiovascular Sciences, brought together researchers, clinicians, and experts from diverse fields for a week to explore major issues in biomedical and translational research. Open to all students across the 29 Graduate Schools of Université Paris Cité, it offered a unique space for learning and interdisciplinary exchange.
Scientific event: the Neuroscience Graduate School highlights its young researchers
Graduate Schools , Research
The Neuroscience Graduate School held the third edition of its scientific event, giving students from across the Graduate School the opportunity to present their research work. This now-established meeting has become a key moment for bringing together Master’s...
Call for applications for US Visiting Faculty 2026-2027
International , International Partnerships , Research
Committed to supporting research at the highest level through their partnership, Université Paris Cité and Sciences Po are calling for outstanding applications for visiting faculty from the United States. Apply before January 30, 2026.Candidates selected under a...
Université Paris Cité welcomed new international staff members
International , International Partnerships , Research , Université Paris Cité
On November 14th, Université Paris Cité welcomed nearly 50 new international staff members – visiting lecturers, doctoral and post-doctoral students, researchers, and contractual lecturer-researchers of foreign nationality – who have arrived since the beginning of...
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok

--- OCR de imagen: CercleRecherche-Vdef_dd352981.jpeg ---
RECHERCHE ©)
PUBLIQUE \ “» DETECTION

BENEFICE UTILISATEUR
CROISSANCE ECONOMIQUE

PROPRIETE INTELLECTUELLE

MISE SUR LE MARCHE

TRANSFERT : LICENCE Q
ET CREATION D’ENTREPRISE
508 PRODUIT / SERVICE / TECHNOLOGIE

--- OCR de imagen: Eyevensys-Varno_ae119dda.jpeg ---
Sy

eyevensys

--- OCR de imagen: Extralab-Varno_46722f6a.jpeg ---
x

extralab

--- OCR de imagen: Astraveus-VArno-1_5c3eaeeb.jpeg ---
»)

ASTRAVEUS