ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Université Paris Cité Inaugurates the Global Health Institute of Paris
Institution
On Wednesday, January 15 th 2025, the University inaugurated the Global Health Institute of Paris. This off-site institute will focus on prevention, research and teaching around non-communicable diseases. With its pioneering interdisciplinary approach, it aims to respond to global health challenges, particularly in low and middle-income countries in the Global South.
Addressing Contemporary Challenges
An upsurge in non-communicable diseases, driven by changes in our lifestyles (diabetes, obesity, hypertension, asthma, etc.), has been seen worldwide, and constitutes a global health priority. The Global Health of Paris aims to provide innovative responses to global public health challenges, focusing on epidemiology, artificial intelligence, human and social sciences as well as biology to devise appropriate prevention and management strategies.
Since its creation, the institute has built on active collaborations with more than 20 countries in sub-Saharan Africa through the African Research Network for Non-communicable diseases (ARNcd), Singapore, and close collaborations with the Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), as well as strategic partnerships with Inserm and the Institut Pasteur. It aspires to become a key player in the promotion of global health, thereby contributing to the Université Paris Cité motto.
According to Édouard Kaminski, President of Université Paris Cité, This new institute embodies our commitment to global health: our ambition is to put our research excellence and our interdisciplinary approach at the service of everyone, especially those populations most vulnerable to epidemiological and socio-environmental transitions”.
An Innovative Approach
In addition to its focus on non-communicable diseases, the Institute is characterised by its interdisciplinary approach, bringing together the university’s three faculties (Health, Sciences and Humanities & Social Sciences). This feature will enable the institute to fully integrate the environmental and economic factors of the areas involved into all of its analyses. Firmly anchored in the local landscape and nurtured by global approaches, the Institute will be able to develop solutions that can be adapted and optimised to suit the needs of local situations.
Read more
Signing of a New Agreement with the University of Chicago
On April 28, 2025, Université Paris Cité took a new step in its cooperation with the University of Chicago. Antoine Kouchner, Vice President for International Relations, traveled to Chicago to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) alongside Katherine Baicker,...
Université Paris Cité Ranks 5th in the World for Innovation
Université Paris Cité (UPCité) is ranked 5th in the world in Clarivate's top 50 universities for innovation, unveiled today. It is also the leading European university. This distinction testifies to the excellence of its research and its ability to nurture technology...
UPCité and Inalco Sign a Framework Agreement
Over the course of their history, Université Paris Cité and the Institut national des langues et civilisations orientales (Inalco) have developed strong ties in research, training, international relations, student experience as well as scientific and technical...
Happy New Year 2025
Best wishes from Université Paris Cité
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok

--- OCR de imagen: Voeux2025_1920x1804-1080x675_2cdcf1d0.jpeg ---
Happy New Year