ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Université Paris Cité Ranks 5th in the World for Innovation
Innovation , Institution , Press
Université Paris Cité (UPCité) is ranked 5th in the world in Clarivate’s top 50 universities for innovation, unveiled today. It is also the leading European university. This distinction testifies to the excellence of its research and its ability to nurture technology transfer. It provides international recognition of the high potential of its research transfer ecosystem.
2,908 Citations!
The top 50 published by Clarivate is based on research and patent data used to assess the innovation impact of the top 50 universities worldwide. It serves as a reminder of the crucial role of basic university research in industrial innovation, by analysing the citations of scientific articles in patents granted to companies.
With 2,908 citations, UPCité has moved straight into the top 5 in the world, behind Harvard, Stanford, MIT and Berkeley, and has climbed to 1st place in Europe. This remarkable performance is made possible by the excellence of the scientific work carried out at UPCité by staff from the university, Institut Pasteur and partner research organisations CNRS, Inserm, IRD and Inria. It also demonstrates the ability of this research to feed the innovation ecosystem through technology transfer.
Promoting Research
UPCité stands by its status as a university with a positive impact on society and its vocation to develop innovations that serve everyone and address the major challenges of both today and tomorrow. This commitment and proactive approach are summed up in the institution’s motto, “Planetary health: healthy humans, within healthy societies, on a healthy planet”.
UPCité’s ability to conduct research at the highest international level and to effectively support its development for the benefit of the socio-economic world is strongly supported by the IdEx funds. These funds make it possible to finance, on the one hand, emerging breakthrough research and, on the other hand, pre-maturation, a stage at the origin of all innovation and essential for the subsequent irrigation of the entire ecosystem. By setting up a Pôle Universitaire d’Innovation (PUI), UPCité is taking on the role of a major public innovation operator and leader of its ecosystem, bringing together not only research bodies, in particular the AP-HP, but also the SATT Erganeo and the ParisBiotechSanté (PBS) incubator.
Édouard Kaminski, President of Université Paris Cité, said:
“Université Paris Cité (UPCité) is delighted to achieve 5th place worldwide in the new Clarivate list of Top 50 universities powering global innovation, which measures the impact of research activity on patent filings. This exceptional performance is based on the excellence of fundamental research conducted by Université Paris Cité teams, in strong collaboration with CNRS and Inserm, demonstrating its ability to transform research into a source of technological transfer. This positions UPCité among the best universities internationally and identifies it as a key player in innovation serving society, addressing the major challenges of today and tomorrow. The recognition of UPCité’s research activities is fully aligned with its institutional signature: ‘Planetary health: healthy humans, within healthy societies, on a healthy planet.”
Clarivate Methodology
The study identifies the top 50 universities cited in academic articles that have received the highest number of patent citations granted to companies and organisations on the Top 100 Global Innovators 2024 list. The data collected by Clarivate comes from the Web of Science scientific and technical information platform and the Dev Derwent World Patents Index (DWPI) and Derwent Patents Citation databases.
Read the press release
Read more
No relationship between Université Paris Cité and the private company operating under the name City University of Paris
Université Paris Cité discovered that a private higher education establishment initially called Intelligest has recently changed its company name for ‘City University of Paris’. Université Paris Cité points out that it has no links whatsoever (association,...
Signing of a New Agreement with the University of Chicago
On April 28, 2025, Université Paris Cité took a new step in its cooperation with the University of Chicago. Antoine Kouchner, Vice President for International Relations, traveled to Chicago to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) alongside Katherine Baicker,...
Circle U. Communities of Practice: Exchange and Innovate!
The European university alliance Circle U. is calling for the creation of Communities of Practice (CoPs). The aim is to bring together administrative, teaching, and research staff with shared interests to exchange best practices. Have a topic you'd like to explore...
UPCité and Inalco Sign a Framework Agreement
Over the course of their history, Université Paris Cité and the Institut national des langues et civilisations orientales (Inalco) have developed strong ties in research, training, international relations, student experience as well as scientific and technical...
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok

--- OCR de imagen: SiegeUP_1920-1-5-1080x675_70c45b24.jpeg ---
20) 0 oom -
Fila

ee Ae ee oe eS