ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Université Paris Cité explores new cooperation opportunities in India
International , International Partnerships
Antoine KOUCHNER , Vice-President for International Relations; Sanae FUKUMA , International Relations Officer; Jan DOUAT-BRUSTON , Head of International Relations at the Faculty of Science; Maïtena LARRECQ ,International Relations Officer at the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences; Juliette CAMUS , Internationalisation Officer at the Faculty of Science; Fanny JOJON, International Relations Officer at the Faculty of Health; Andrés GRAJALES VERA, Head of International Relations at the Faculty of Health
Université Paris Cité ranks among the top three French institutions in terms of number of scientific publications made in collaboration with India, with a total of 2,749 publications. This visit followed the second Franco-Indian Joint Committee on Science and Technology, which was held in Delhi in January 2024. Several research areas have been identified as priorities for scientific cooperation, including metabolic and cardiovascular diseases, emerging infectious diseases, the development of decarbonized hydrogen, marine sciences and technologies, and applied mathematics. This mission confirmed a shared commitment to support teachers-researchers and student mobility.
UPCité at the APAIE in New Delhi
Univresité Paris Cité was at the Campus France booth during the APAIE (Asia-Pacific Association for International Education) in New Delhi on March 25 and 26. The delegation discussed and exchanged with universities and academic institutions from across the continent and beyond.
A first step towards academic and scientific partnerships
The delegation held meetings with several Indian universities and institutions. Members from the faculties of Humanities and Social Sciences, Sciences, and Health collaborated with their Indian counterparts, laying the initial foundations for partnerships in various disciplines such as humanities, fundamental sciences, and medical research.
The delegation was assisted by representatives from the Consulate General of France in Mumbai, Mr Philippe Maurin, Scientific and Higher Education Attaché, Ms Amruta Datar, Deputy to Head of Science and University Cooperation, Mr Angel Fortin, Scientific and Academic cooperation Officer, and Ms Rini Abraham, Campus France Manager in Pune, who provided their constant support throughout the mission.
These initial meetings pave the way for future collaborative projects. This mission reaffirms Université Paris Cité’s standing in the global academic landscape, particularly its commitment to advancing research.
You are interested in UPCité’s international cooperation?
International Relations Department
cooperation.iro@u-paris.fr
À lire aussi
[Bottom-up calls for projects – Circle U.] Internationalise your courses and missions at UPCité!
Université Paris Cité wishes to support the investment of its administrative staff and academics in Circle U.the European alliance. How? By funding up to 5,000€ projects such as organising international conferences, staff weeks, translating documents to propose...
Université Paris Cité on the path to internationalising its programmes
L'Université Paris Cité is committed to internationalising part of its study programmes and supporting academic staff who wish to be part of this initiative. In order to provide them with the best support possible in gradually transforming their course modules, it has...
Call for applications for US Visiting Faculty 2026-2027
Committed to supporting research at the highest level through their partnership, Université Paris Cité and Sciences Po are calling for outstanding applications for visiting faculty from the United States. Apply before January 30, 2026.Candidates selected under a...
[SMARTS-UP Graduate Schools call for applications] International scholarships for Master’s students
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok