ENLIGHTEN THE FUTURE
You are
Programmes
JOIN US Students Researchers and PhD students Scholarships Living in France
Students
Researchers and PhD students
Scholarships
Living in France
UNIVERSITY About us Organisation Circle U. development strategy Partnerships Careers at Université Paris Cité Campuses
About us
Organisation
Circle U.
development strategy
Partnerships
Careers at Université Paris Cité
Campuses
EDUCATION Higher education system Departments Find your programme Graduate schools Build your project Summer Schools International Mobility
Higher education system
Departments
Find your programme
Graduate schools
Build your project
Summer Schools
International Mobility
RESEARCH Excellence in research Awards and Distinctions Laboratories Scientific cooperation Interdisciplinary institutes Research and Technical Platforms Technology Transfer and Innovation Doctoral Studies Scientific publications
Excellence in research
Awards and Distinctions
Laboratories
Scientific cooperation
Interdisciplinary institutes
Research and Technical Platforms
Technology Transfer and Innovation
Doctoral Studies
Scientific publications
STUDENT LIFE Get involved Student Associations Libraries Health and social services Culture Sports Housing
Get involved
Student Associations
Libraries
Health and social services
Culture
Sports
Housing
Université Paris Cité
Université Paris Cité covers a wide range of disciplines, with one of the most comprehensive and ambitious educational offerings available in the world. Located on some twenty campuses and research sites, our University has an exceptional heritage within Paris and its inner suburbs. Between history, prestige and modernity, Université Paris Cité is fully integrated into its urban environment.
Download
→ Institutional brochure
A Fully Comprehensive University in Paris
At the heart of a global network of knowledge and innovation, Université Paris Cité is France’s leading multidisciplinary university. It covers a wide range of disciplines, with one of the most comprehensive and ambitious educational offerings available in the world. Université Paris Cité is part of the incarnation of a world city, aware of its place and missions, open to youth and knowledge.
Born in 2019 from the merger of the universities of Paris Diderot, Paris Descartes and Institut de physique du globe de Paris, the ambition of Université Paris Cité is to lead and develop an exceptional potential to meet the challenges of tomorrow’s society. With a recognized international standing, as well as a strategic portfolio of privileged academic partners throughout the world, it offers its students state-of-the-art, innovative courses in the following field :
Arts, Humanities and Languages;
Human, Economic and Social Sciences;
Science and Technology;
Medicine , Dentistry, Pharmacy and Nursing.
Université Paris Cité is fully engaged in an experience that brings together thought leadership, pedagogical innovation in education, and excellence in research at the graduate level.
Our mission
As a world leading institution, Université Paris Cité has a proactive role to play by serving the needs and aspirations of society in a global context. It provides transformative and innovative educational programmes through its cutting edge research that empowers its students and staff to make a positive impact in an ever changing world. As a public institution of a scientific, cultural and professional nature (EPSCP), the objectives and missions of Université Paris Cité are governed by the Education Code.
Governance
Institutional policies
Our vision and values
Key Figures
With 63,000 students, 4,500 staff and 119 laboratories, Université Paris Cité is part of the incarnation of a world city, aware of its place and missions, open to the world, youth and knowledge.
Staff members
Teachers-researchers, among which 3260 researchers are housed
Administrative and technical staff
Students
Students preparing a degree
Doctoral schools
%
of PhD awarded in France
Libraries
Student associations
Scientific strength
Laboratories
French University in term of citation rate per article
Top 100
In the Shanghai ranking
%
Of the scientific publications in France come from Université Paris Cité
Patrimony
Sites and campuses
Museums
Youtube
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
Linkedin
TikTok